PART 403—SPECIAL PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1302 and 1395hh. Subpart A [Reserved] Subpart B—Medicare Supplemental Policies Source: 47 FR 32400, July 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted. § 403.200 Basis and scope. (a) Provisions of the legislation. This subpart implements, in part, section 1882 of the Social Security Act. The intent of that section is to enable Medicare beneficiaries to identify Medicare supplemental policies that do not duplicate Medicare, and that provide adequate, fairly priced protection against expenses not covered by Medicare. The legislation establishes certain standards for Medicare supplemental policies and provides two methods for informing Medicare beneficiaries which policies meet those standards: (1) Through a State approved program, that is, a program that a Supplemental Health Insurance Panel determines to meet certain minimum requirements for the regulation of Medicare supplemental policies; and (2) In a State without an approved program, through certification by the Secretary of policies voluntarily submitted by insuring organizations for review against the standards. (b) Scope of subpart. This subpart sets forth the standards and procedures CMS will use to implement the voluntary certification program. General Provisions § 403.201 State regulation of insurance policies. (a) The provisions of this subpart do not affect the right of a State to regulate policies marketed in that State. (b) Approval of a policy under the voluntary certification program, as provided for in § 403.235(b), does not authorize the insuring organization to market a policy that does not conform to applicable State laws and regulations. § 403.205 Medicare supplemental policy. (a) Except as specified in paragraph (e) of this section, Medicare supplemental (or Medigap) policy means a health insurance policy or other health benefit plan that— (1) A private entity offers to a Medicare beneficiary; and (2) Is primarily designed, or is advertised, marketed, or otherwise purported to provide payment for expenses incurred for services and items that are not reimbursed under the Medicare program because of deductibles, coinsurance, or other limitations under Medicare. (b) The term policy includes both policy form and policy as specified in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. (1) Policy form. Policy form is the form of health insurance contract that is approved by and on file with the State agency for the regulation of insurance. (2) Policy. Policy is the contract— (i) Issued under the policy form; and (ii) Held by the policy holder. (c) If the policy otherwise meets the definition in this section, a Medicare supplemental policy includes- (1) An individual policy; (2) A group policy; (3) A rider attached to an individual or group policy; or (4) As of January 1, 2006, a stand-alone limited health benefit plan or policy that supplements Medicare benefits and is sold primarily to Medicare beneficiaries. (d) Any rider attached to a Medicare supplemental policy becomes an integral part of the basic policy. (e) Medicare supplemental policy does not include a Medicare Advantage plan, a Prescription Drug Plan under Part D, or any of the other types of health insurance policies or health benefit plans that are excluded from the definition of a Medicare supplemental policy in section 1882(g)(1) of the Act. [70 FR 4525, Jan. 28, 2005] § 403.206 General standards for Medicare supplemental policies. (a) For purposes of the voluntary certification program described in this subpart, a policy must meet— (1) The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) model standards as defined in § 405.210; and (2) The loss ratio standards specified in § 403.215. (b) Except as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, the standards specified in paragraph (a) of this section must be met in a single policy. (c) In the case of a nonprofit hospital or a medical association where State law prohibits the inclusion of all benefits in a single policy, the standards specified in paragraph (a) of the section must be met in two or more policies issued in conjunction with one another. § 403.210 NAIC model standards. (a) NAIC model standards means the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) “Model Regulation to Implement the Individual Accident and Insurance Minimum Standards Act” (as amended and adopted by the NAIC on June 6, 1979, as it applies to Medicare supplemental policies). Copies of the NAIC model standards can be purchased from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners at 350 Bishops Way, Brookfield, Wisconsin 53004, and from the NIARS Corporation, 318 Franklin Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55404. (b) The policy must comply with the provisions of the NAIC model standards, except as follows— (1) Policy, for purposes of this paragraph, means individual and group policy, as specified in § 403.205. The NAIC model standards limit “policy” to individual policy. (2) The policy must meet the loss ratio standards specified in § 403.215. [47 FR 32400, July 26, 1982; 49 FR 44472, Nov. 7, 1984] § 403.215 Loss ratio standards. (a) The policy must be expected to return to the policyholders, in the form of aggregate benefits provided under the policy— (1) At least 75 percent of the aggregate amount of premiums in the case of group policies; and (2) At least 60 percent of the aggregate amount of premiums in the case of individual policies. (b) For purposes of loss ratio requirements, policies issued as a result of solicitation of individuals through the mail or by mass media advertising are considered individual policies. State Regulatory Programs § 403.220 Supplemental Health Insurance Panel. (a) Membership. The Supplemental Health Insurance Panel (Panel) consists of— (1) The Secretary or a designee, who serves as chairperson, and (2) Four State Commissioners or Superintendents of Insurance appointed by the President. (The terms Commissioner or Superintendent of Insurance include persons of similar rank.) (b) Functions. (1) The Panel determines whether or not a State regulatory program for Medicare supplemental health insurance policies meets and continues to meet minimum requirements specified in section 1882 of the Social Security Act. (2) The chairperson of the Panel informs the State Commissioners and Superintendents of Insurance of all determinations made under paragraph (b)(1) of this section. § 403.222 State with an approved regulatory program. (a) A State has an approved regulatory program if the Panel determines that the State has in effect under State law a regulatory program that provides for the application of standards, with respect to each Medicare supplemental policy issued in that State, that are equal to or more stringent than those specified in section 1882 of the Social Security Act. (b) Policy issued in that State means— (1) A group policy, if the holder of the master policy resides in that State; and (2) An individual policy, if the policy is— (i) Issued in that State; or (ii) Issued for delivery in that State. (c) A policy issued in a State with an approved regulatory program is considered to meet the NAIC model standards in § 403.210 and loss ratio standards in § 403.215. Voluntary Certification Program: General Provisions § 403.231 Emblem. (a) The emblem is a graphic symbol, approved by HHS, that indicates that CMS has certified a policy as meeting the requirements of the voluntary certification program, specified in § 403.232. (b) Unless prohibited by the State in which the policy is marketed, the insuring organization may display the emblem on policies certified under the voluntary certification program. (c) The manner in which the emblem may be displayed and the conditions and restrictions relating to its use will be stated in the letter with which CMS notifies the insuring organization that a policy has been certified. The insuring organization must comply with these conditions and restrictions. (d) If a certified policy is issued in a State that later has an approved regulatory program, as provided for in § 403.222, the insuring organization may display the emblem on the policy until the earliest of the following— (1) When prohibited by State law or regulation. (2) When the policy no longer meets the requirements for Medicare supplemental policies specified in § 403.206. (3) The date the insuring organization would be required to submit material to CMS for annual review in order to retain certification, if the State did not have an approved program (see § 403.239). § 403.232 Requirements and procedures for obtaining certification. (a) To be certified by CMS, a policy must meet— (1) The NAIC model standards specified in § 403.210; (2) The loss ratio standards specified in § 403.215; and (3) Any State requirements applicable to a policy— (i) Issued in that State; or (ii) Marketed in that State. (b) An insuring organization requesting certification of a policy must submit the following to CMS for review— (1) A copy of the policy form (including all the documents that would constitute the contract of insurance that is proposed to be marketed as a certified policy). (2) A copy of the application form including all attachments. (3) A copy of the uniform certificate issued under a group policy. (4) A copy of the outline of coverage, in the form prescribed by the NAIC model standards. (5) A copy of the Medicare supplement buyers' guide to be provided to all applicants if the buyers' guide is not the CMS/NAIC buyers' guide. (6) A statement of when and how the outline of coverage and the buyers' guide will be delivered and copies of applicable receipt forms. (7) A copy of the notice of replacement and statement as to when and how that notice will be delivered. (8) A list of States in which the policy is authorized for sale. If the policy was approved under a deemer provision in any State, the conditions involved must be specified. (9) A copy of the loss ratio calculations, as specified in § 403.250. (10) Loss ratio supporting data, as specified in § 403.256. (11) A statement of actuarial opinion, as specified in § 403.258. (12) A statement that the insuring organization will notify the policyholders in writing, within the period of time specified in § 403.245(c), if the policy is identified as a certified policy at the time of sale and later loses certification. (13) A signed statement in which the president of the insuring organization, or a designee, attests that— (i) The policy meets the requirements specified in paragraph (a) of this section; and (ii) The information submitted to CMS for review is accurate and complete and does not misrepresent any material fact. § 403.235 Review and certification of policies. (a) CMS will review policies that the insuring organization voluntarily submits, except that CMS will not review a policy issued in a State with an approved regulatory program under § 403.222. (b) If the requirements specified in § 403.232 are met, CMS will— (1) Certify the policy; and (2) Authorize the insuring organization to display the emblem on the policy, as provided for in § 403.231. (c) If CMS certifies a policy, it will inform all State Commissioners and Superintendents of Insurance of that fact. § 403.239 Submittal of material to retain certification. (a) CMS certification of a policy that continues to meet the standards will remain in effect, if the insuring organization files the following material with CMS no later than the date specified in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section— (1) Any changes in the material, specified in § 403.232(b), that was submitted for previous certification. (2) The loss ratio supporting data specified in § 403.256(b). (3) A signed statement in which the president of the insuring organization, or a designee, attests that— (i) The policy continues to meet the requirements specified in § 403.232(a); and (ii) The information submitted to CMS for review is accurate and complete and does not misrepresent any material fact. (b) Except as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, the insuring organization must file the material with CMS no later than June 30 of each year. The first time the insuring organization must file the material is no later than June 30 of the calendar year that follows the year in which CMS— (1) Certifies a new policy; or (2) Certifies a policy that lost certification as provided in § 403.245. (c) If the loss ratio calculation period, used to calculate the expected loss ratio for the last actuarial certification submitted to CMS, ends before the June 30 date of paragraph (b) of this section, the insuring organization must file the material with CMS no later then the last day of that rate calculation period. § 403.245 Loss of certification. (a) A policy loses certification if— (1) The insuring organization withdraws the policy from the voluntary certification program; or (2) CMS determines that— (i) The policy fails to meet the requirements specified in § 403.232(a); or (ii) The insuring organization has failed to meet the requirements for submittal of material specified in § 403.239. (b) If a policy loses its certification, CMS will inform all State Commissioners and Superintendents of Insurance of that fact. (c) If a policy that displays the emblem, or that has been marketed as a certified policy without the emblem, loses certification, the insuring organization must notify each holder of the policy, or of a certificate issued under the policy, of that fact. The notice must be in writing and sent by the earlier of— (1) The date of the first regular premium notice after the date the policy loses its certification; or (2) 60 days after the date the policy loses its certification. § 403.248 Administrative review of CMS determinations. (a) This section provides for administrative review if CMS determines— (1) Not to certify a policy; or (2) That a policy no longer meets the standards for certification. (b) If CMS makes a determination specified in paragraph (a) of this section, it will send a notice to the insuring organization containing the following information: (1) That CMS has made such a determination. (2) The reasons for the determination. (3) That the insuring organization has 30 days from the date of the notice to— (i) Request, in writing, an administrative review of the CMS determination; and (ii) Submit additional information to CMS for review. (4) That, if the insuring organization requests an administrative review, CMS will conduct the review, as provided for in paragraph (c) of this section. (5) That, in a case involving loss of certification, the CMS determination will go into effect 30 days from the date of the notice, unless the insuring organization requests an administrative review. If the insuring organization requests an administrative review, the policy retains its certification until CMS makes a final determination. (c) If the insuring organization requests an administrative review, CMS will conduct the review as follows— (1) A CMS official, not involved in the initial CMS determination, will initiate and complete an administrative review within 90 days of the date of the notice provided for in paragraph (b) of this section. (2) The official will consider— (i) The original material submitted to CMS for review, as specified in § 403.232(b) or § 403.239(a); and (ii) Any additional information, that the insuring organization submits to CMS. (3) Within 15 days after the administrative review is completed, CMS will inform the insuring organization in writing of the final decision, with an explanation of the final decision. (4) If the final decision is that a policy lose its certification, the loss of certification will go into effect 15 days after the date of CMS's notice informing the insuring organization of the final decision. Voluntary Certification Program: Loss Ratio Provisions § 403.250 Loss ratio calculations: General provisions. (a) Basic formula. The expected loss ratio is calculated by determining the ratio of benefits to premiums. (b) Calculations. The insuring organization must calculate loss ratios according to the provisions of §§ 403.251, 403.253, and 403.254. § 403.251 Loss ratio date and time frame provisions. (a) Initial calculation date means the first date of the period that the insuring organization uses to calculate the policy's expected loss ratio. (1) The initial calculation date may be before, the same as, or after the date the insuring organization sends the policy to CMS for review, except— (2) The initial calculation date must not be earlier than January 1 of the calendar year in which the policy is sent to CMS. (b) Loss ratio calculation period means the period beginning with the initial calculation date and ending with the last day of the period for which the insuring organization calculates the policy's scale of premiums. (c) To calculate “present values”, the insuring organization may ignore discounting (an actuarial procedure that provides for the impact of a variety of factors, such as lapse of policies) for loss ratio calculation periods not exceeding 12 months. § 403.253 Calculation of benefits. (a) General provisions. (1) Except as provided for in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, calculate the amount of “benefits” by— (i) Adding the present values on the initial calculation date of— (A) Expected incurred benefits in the loss ratio calculation period, to— (B) The total policy reserve at the last day of the loss ratio calculation period: and (ii) Subtracting the total policy reserve on the initial calculation date from the sum of these values. (2) To calculate the amount of “benefits” in the case of community or pool rated individual or group policies rerated on an annual basis, calculate the expected incurred benefits in the loss ratio calculation period. (b) Calculation of total policy reserve —(1) Option for calculation. The insuring organization must calculate “total policy reserve” according to the provisions of paragraph (b) (2) or (3) of this section. (2) Total policy reserve: Federal provisions. (i) “Total policy reserve” means the sum of— (A) Additional reserve; and (B) The reserve for future contingent benefits. (ii) Additional reserve means the amount calculated on a net level reserve basis, using appropriate values to account for lapse, mortality, morbidity, and interest, that on the valuation date represents— (A) The present value of expected incurred benefits over the loss ratio calculation period; less— (B) The present value of expected net premiums over the loss ratio calculation period. (iii) Net premium means the level portion of the gross premium used in calculating the additional reserve. On the day the policy is issued, the present value of the series of those portions equals the present value of the expected incurred claims over the period that the gross premiums are computed to provide coverage. (iv) Reserve for future contingent benefits means the amounts, not elsewhere included, that provide for the extension of benefits after insurance coverage terminates. These benefits— (A) Are predicated on a health condition existing on the date coverage ends; (B) Accrue after the date coverage ends; and (C) Are payable after the valuation date. (3) Total policy reserve: State provisions. “Total policy reserve” means the total policy reserve calculated according to appropriate State law or regulation. § 403.254 Calculation of premiums. (a) General provisions. To calculate the amount of “premiums”, calculate the present value on the initial calculation date of expected earned premiums for the loss ratio calculation period. (b) Specific provisions. (1) Earned premium for a given period means— (i) Written premiums for the period; plus— (ii) The total premium reserve at the beginning of the period; less— (iii) The total premium reserve at the end of the period. (2) Written premiums in a period means— (i) Premiums collected in that period; plus— (ii) Premiums due and uncollected at the end of that period; less— (iii) Premiums due and uncollected at the beginning of that period. (3) Total premium reserve means the sum of— (i) The unearned premium reserve; (ii) The advance premium reserve; and (iii) The reserve for rate credits. (4) Unearned premium reserve means the portion of gross premiums due that provide for days of insurance coverage after the valuation date. (5) Advance premium reserve means premiums received by the insuring organization that are due after the valuation date. (6) Reserve for rate credits means rate credits on a group policy that— (i) Accrue by the valuation date of the policy; and (ii) Are paid or credited after the valuation date. § 403.256 Loss ratio supporting data. (a) For purposes of requesting CMS certification under § 403.232, the insuring organization must submit the following loss ratio data to CMS for review— (1) A statement of why the policy is to be considered, for purposes of the loss ratio standards, an individual or a group policy. (2) The earliest age at which policyholders can purchase the policy. (3) The general marketing method and the underwriting criteria used for the selection of applicants to whom coverage is offered. (4) What policies are to be included under the one policy form, by the dates the policies are issued. (5) The loss ratio calculation period. (6) The scale of premiums for the loss ratio calculation period. (7) The expected level of earned premiums in the loss ratio calculation period. (8) The expected level of incurred claims in the loss ratio calculation period. (9) A description of how the following assumptions were used in calculating the loss ratio. (i) Morbidity. (ii) Mortality. (iii) Lapse. (iv) Assumed increases in the Medicare deductible. (v) Impact of inflation on reimbursement per service. (vi) Interest. (vii) Expected distribution, by age and sex, of persons who will purchase the policy in the coming year. (viii) Expected impact on morbidity by policy duration of— (A) The process used to select insureds from among those that apply for a policy; and (B) Pre-existing condition clauses in the policy. (b) For purposes of requesting continued CMS certification under § 403.239(a), the insuring organization must submit the following to CMS— (1) A description of all changes in the loss ratio data, specified in paragraph (a) of this section, that occurred since CMS last reviewed the policy. (2) The past loss ratio experience for the policy, including the experience of all riders and endorsements issued under the policy. The loss ratio experience data must include earned premiums, incurred claims, and total policy reserves that the insuring organization calculates— (i) For all years of issue combined; and (ii) Separately for each calendar year since CMS first certified the policy. § 403.258 Statement of actuarial opinion. (a) For purposes of certification requests submitted under § 403.232(b) and subsequent review as specified in § 403.239(a), statement of actuarial opinion means a signed declaration in which a qualified actuary states that the assumptions used in calculating the expected loss ratio are appropriate and reasonable, taking into account actual policy experience, if any, and reasonable expectations. (b) Qualified actuary means— (1) A member in good standing of the American Academy of Actuaries; or (2) A person who has otherwise demonstrated his or her actuarial competence to the satisfaction of the Commissioner or Superintendent of Insurance of the domiciliary State of the insuring organization. Subpart C—Recognition of State Reimbursement Control Systems Source: 51 FR 15492, Apr. 24, 1986, unless otherwise noted. § 403.300 Basis and purpose. (a) Basis. This subpart implements section 1886(c) of the Act, which authorizes payment for Medicare inpatient hospital services in accordance with a State's reimbursement control system rather than under the Medicare reimbursement principles as described in CMS's regulations and instructions. (b) Purpose. Contained in this subpart are— (1) The basic requirements that a State reimbursement control system must meet in order to be approved by CMS; (2) A description of CMS's review and evaluation procedures; and (3) The conditions that apply if the system is approved. § 403.302 Definitions. For purposes of this subpart— Chief executive officer of a State means the Governor of the State or the Governor's designee. Existing demonstration project refers to demonstration projects approved by CMS under the authority of section 402(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1967 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-1) or section 222(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1972 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-1 (note)) and in effect on April 20, 1983 (the date of the enactment of Pub. L. 98-21 (Social Security Amendments of 1983)). Federal hospital means a hospital that is administered by, or that is under exclusive contract with, the Department of Defense, the Veterans Administration, or the Indian Health Service. State system or system refers to a State reimbursement control system that is approved by CMS under the authority of section 1886(c) of the Act and that satisfies the requirements described in this subpart. § 403.304 Minimum requirements for State systems—discretionary approval. (a) Discretionary approval by CMS. CMS may approve Medicare payments under a State system, if CMS determines that the system meets the requirements in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and, if applicable paragraph (d) of this section. (b) Requirements for State system. (1) An application for approval of the system must be submitted to CMS by the Chief Executive Officer of the State. (2) The State system must apply to substantially all non-Federal acute care hospitals in the State. (3) All hospitals covered by the system must have and maintain a utilization and quality control review agreement with a Quality Improvement Organization, as required under section 1866(a)(1)(F) of the Act and § 466.78(a) of this chapter. (4) Federal hospitals must be excluded from the State system. (5) Nonacute care or specialty hospital (such as rehabilitation, psychiatric, or children's hospitals) may, at the option of the State, be excluded from the State system. (6) The State system must apply to at least 75 percent of all revenues or expenses— (i) For inpatient hospital services in the State; and (ii) For inpatient hospital services under the State's Medicaid plan. (7) Under the system, HMOs and competitive medical plans (CMPs), as defined by section 1876(b) of the Act and part 417 of this chapter, must be allowed to negotiate payment rates with hospitals. (8) The system must limit hospital charges for Medicare beneficiaries to deductibles, coinsurance or non-covered services. (9) Unless a waiver is granted by CMS under § 489.23 of this chapter, the system must prohibit payment, as required under section 1862(a)(14) of the Act and § 405.310(m) of this chapter, for nonphysician services provided to hospital inpatients under Part B of Medicare. (10) The system must require hospitals to submit Medicare cost reports or approved reports in lieu of Medicare cost reports as required. (11) The system must require— (i) Preparation, collection, or retention by the State of reports (such as financial, administrative, or statistical reports) that may be necessary, as determined by CMS, to review and monitor the State's assurances; and (ii) Submission of the reports to CMS upon request. (12) The system must provide hospitals an opportunity to appeal errors that they believe have been made in the determination of their payment rates. The system, if it is prospective may not permit providers to file administrative appeals that would result in a retroactive revision of prospectively determined payment rates. (c) Satisfactory assurances. The State must provide to CMS satisfactory assurance as to the following: (1) The system provides for equitable treatment of hospital patients and hospital employees. (2) The system provides for equitable treatment of all entities that pay hospitals for inpatient hospital services, including Federal and State programs. Under the requirement, the following conditions must be met: (i) Both the Medicare and Medicaid programs must participate under the system. (ii) The State must assure equitable and uniform treatment under the system of third-party payors of inpatient hospital services in terms of opportunity. Equitable opportunity must include, but need not be limited to, participation in the system and availability of discounts. Criteria under which discounts are made available must be equitably and uniformly applied to all payors, except for discounts negotiated by HMOs and CMPs. Discounts available to HMOs and CMPs as result of their statutory right to negotiate payment rates independently of a State system, as described in paragraph (b)(7) of this section, need not be available to other payors. (iii) The State must assure that all third-party payors that participate under the system share in the system's risks and benefits. (3) The amount of Medicare payments made under the system over 36-month periods may not exceed the amount of Medicare payment that would otherwise have been made under the Medicare principles of reimbursement for Medicare items and services had the State system not been in effect. States must submit the assurance and supporting data as required by § 403.320 to document that the payment limit is not exceeded. States that have an existing Medicare demonstration project in effect on April 20, 1983, and that have requested approval of a State system under section 1886(c)(4) of the Act, may elect to have the effectiveness of the State system under this paragraph judged on the basis of the State system's rate of increase or inflation in Medicare inpatient hospital payments as compared to the national rate of increase or inflation for such payments during the three cost reporting periods of the hospitals in the State beginning on or after October 1, 1983. (d) Additional cost-effectiveness assurance. If the assurances and supporting data required under paragraph (c)(3) of this section are insufficient to provide assurance satisfactory to CMS regarding the cost-effectiveness of a State system, the State may additionally submit one of the following assurances in order to meet the cost-effectiveness test: (1) State responsibility for excess payments. The State must agree that each month Medicare intermediaries will disburse to the State's hospital Federal funds that in the aggregate equal no more than would have been disbursed in the absence of the State system. Any additional funds necessary to pay hospitals for Medicare services required by the State system will be paid to the intermediaries by the State. These additional amounts will be refunded to the State by the intermediaries to the extent that, in subsequent months, the State system requires a smaller aggregate payment for Medicare services than would have been paid in the absence of the State system. (2) Limitations on payments. (i) The State must agree that if its projections exceed what Medicare would pay in any particular period, the State and CMS will establish and agreed upon payment schedule that will limit payments under the State system based on a predetermined percentage relationship between projected State payments and what payments would have been under Medicare. (ii) If deviation from the predetermined relationship described in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section occurs, the State must further agree that— (A) Medicare payments would be capped automatically at payment levels based on the rates used for the Medicare prospective payment system and the State would be required to pay the difference to individual hospitals in its system; or (B) The State may provide by legislation or legally binding regulations that any reduced payments to hospitals under the system that result from this cost-effectiveness assurance will constitute full and final payment for hospital services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries for the period covered by these reduced payments. § 403.306 Additional requirements for State systems—mandatory approval. (a) General policy —(1) Mandatory approval. HFCA will approve an application for Medicare reimbursement under a State system if the system meets all of the requirements of § 403.304 and of paragraph (b) of this section. (2) Exception. CMS may approve an application if the State system meets all of the requirements of § 403.304 but only some of the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. (b) Additional requirements —(1) Operation of system. The system must— (i) Be operated directly by the State or by entity designated under State law; (ii) Provide for payments to hospitals using a methodology under which— (A) Prospectively determined payment rates are established; and (B) Exceptions, adjustments, and methods for changes in methodology are set forth; (iii) Provide that a change by the State in the system that has the effect of materially changing payments to hospitals can take effect only upon 60 days notice to CMS and to the hospitals likely to be materially affected by the change and upon CMS's approval of the change. (2) Satisfactory assurances —(i) Admissions practice. The State must assure that the operation of the system will not result in any change in hospital admission practices that result in— (A) A significant reduction in the proportion of patients receiving hospital services covered under the system who have no third-party coverage and who are unable to pay for hospital services; (B) A significant reduction in the proportion of individuals admitted to hospitals for inpatient hospital services for which payment is less, or is likely to be less, than the anticipated charges for or cost of the services; (C) A refusal to admit patients who would be expected to require unusually costly or prolonged treatment for reasons other than those related to the appropriateness of the care available at the hospital; or (D) A refusal to provide emergency services to any person who is in need of emergency services, if the hospital provides the services. (ii) Consultation with local government officials. The State must provide documentation that it has consulted with local government officials concerning the impact of the system on publicly owned or operated hospitals. § 403.308 State systems under demonstration projects—mandatory approval. CMS will approve an application from a State for a State system if— (a) The system was in effect prior to April 20, 1983 under an existing demonstration project; and (b) The minimum requirements and assurances for approval of a State system are met under § 403.304 (b)(1)-(10) and § 403.304(c), and, if appropriate § 403.304(d). § 403.310 Reduction in payments. (a) General rule. If CMS determines that the satisfactory assurances required of a State under § 403.304(c) and, if applicable, § 403.304(d) have not been met, or will not be met, with respect to any 36-month period, CMS will reduce Medicare payments to individual hospitals being reimbursed under the State's system or, if applicable, under the Medicare payment system, in an amount equal to the amount by which the Medicare payments under the system exceed the amount of Medicare payments to such hospitals that otherwise would have been made not using the State system. The amount of the recoupment will include, when appropriate, interest charges computed in accordance with § 405.378 of this chapter. (b) Recoupment procedures. The amount of the overpayment will be recouped on a proportionate basis from each of those hospitals that received payments under the State system that exceeded the payments they would have received under the Medicare payment system. Each hospital's share of the aggregate excess payment will be determined on the basis of a comparison of the hospital's proportionate share of the aggregate payment received under the State system that is in excess of what the aggregate payment would have been under the Medicare payment system. Recoupments may be accomplished by a hospital's direct payment to the Medicare program or by offsets to future payments made to the hospital. (c) Alternative recoupment procedures. As an alternative to the recoupment procedures described in paragraph (b) of this section and subject to CMS's acceptance, the State may provide, by legislation or legally binding regulations, procedures for the recoupment of the amount of payments that exceed the amount of payments that otherwise would have been paid by Medicare if the State system had not been in effect. (d) Rule for existing Medicare demonstration projects. In cases of existing Medicare demonstration projects where the expenditure test is to be applied by a rate of increase factor, the amount of the excess payment will be determined, for the three hospital cost reporting periods beginning before October 1, 1986, by a comparison of the State system's rate of increase to the national rate of increase. Recoupment of excessive payments will be assessed and recouped as described in this section. [51 FR 15492, Apr. 24, 1986, as amended at 61 FR 63748, Dec. 2, 1996] § 403.312 Submittal of application. The Chief Executive Officer of the State is responsible for— (a) Submittal of the application to CMS for approval; and (b) Supplying the assurances and necessary documentation as required under §§ 403.304 through 403.308. § 403.314 Evaluation of State systems. CMS will evaluate all State applications for approval of State systems and notify the State of its determination within 60 days. § 403.316 Reconsideration of certain denied applications. (a) Request for reconsideration. If CMS denies an application for a State system, the State may request that CMS reconsider the denial if the State believes that its system meets all of the requirements for mandatory approval under §§ 403.304 and 403.306 or, in the case of a State with a system operating under an existing demonstration project, the applicable requirements of §§ 403.304 and 403.308. (b) Time limit. (1) The State must submit its request for reconsideration within 60 days after the date of CMS's notice that the application was denied. (2) CMS will notify the State of the results of its reconsideration within 60 days after it receives the request for reconsideration. § 403.318 Approval of State systems. (a) Approval agreement. If CMS approves a State system, a written agreement will be executed between CMS and the Chief Executive Officer of the State. The agreement must incorporate any terms of the State's application for approval of the system as agreed to by the parties and, as a minimum, must contain provisions that require the following: (1) The system is operated directly by the State or an entity designated by State law. (2) For purposes of the Medicare program, the State's system applies only to Medicare payments for inpatient, and if applicable, outpatient hospital services. (3) The system conforms to applicable Medicare law and regulations other than those relating to the amount of reimbursement for inpatient hospital services, or for inpatient and outpatient services, whichever the State system covers. Applicable regulations include, for example, those describing Medicare benefits and entitlement requirements for program beneficiaries, as explained in parts 406 and 409 of this chapter; the requirements at part 405, subpart J of this chapter specifying conditions of participation for hospitals; the requirements at part 405, subparts A, G, and S of this chapter on Medicare program administration; and all applicable fraud and abuse regulations contained in titles 42 and 45 of the CFR. (4) The State must obtain CMS's approval of the State's reporting forms and of provider cost reporting forms or other forms that have not been approved by CMS but that are necessary for the collection of required information. (b) Effective date. An approved State system may not be effective earlier than the date of the approval agreement, which may not be retroactive. § 403.320 CMS review and monitoring of State systems. (a) General rule. The State must submit an assurance and detailed and quantitative studies of provider cost and financial data and projections to support the effectiveness of its system, as required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. (b) Required information. (1) Under § 403.304(c)(3) an assurance is required that the system will not result in greater payments over a 36-month period than would have otherwise been made under Medicare not using such system. If a State that has an existing demonstration project in effect on April 20, 1983 elects under § 403.304(c)(3) to have the effectiveness of its system judged on the basis of a rate of increase factor, the State must submit an assurance that its rate of increase or inflation in inpatient hospital payments does not exceed, for that portion of the 36-month period that is subject to this test, the national rate of increase or inflation in Medicare inpatient hospital payments. The election of the rate of increase test applies only to the three cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1983. At the end of these cost reporting periods, the State must assure, beginning with the first month after the expiration of the third cost reporting period beginning after October 1, 1983, that payments under its system will not exceed over the remainder of the 36-month period what Medicare payments would have been. (2) Estimates and data are required to support the State's assurance, required under § 403.304(c)(3), that expenditures under the State system will not exceed what Medicare would have paid over a 36-month period. The estimates and projections of what Medicare would have otherwise paid must take into account all the Medicare reimbursement principles in effect at the time and, for any period in which payments either exceed or are less than Medicare levels, the values of interest the Medicare Trust Fund earned, or would have earned, on these amounts. Upon application for approval, the State must submit projections for each hospital for the first 12-month period covered by the assurance, in both the aggregate and on a per discharge basis, of Medicare inpatient expenditures under Medicare principles of reimbursement and parallel projections of Medicare inpatient expenditures under the State's system and the resulting cost or savings to Medicare. The State must also submit separate statewide projections for each year of the 36-month period, in both the aggregate and on a weighted average discharge basis, of inpatient expenditures under the State system and under the Medicare principles of reimbursement. (3) The projection submitted under paragraph (b)(2) of this section must include a detailed description of the methodology and assumptions used to derive the expenditure amounts under both systems. In instances where the assumptions are different under the projections cited in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the State must provide a detailed explanation of the reasons for the differences. At a minimum, the following separate data and assumptions are to be included in the projections for the Medicare principles and for the State's system. (i) The State system base year and the Medicare allowable and reimbursable cost of each hospital that the State used to develop the projections, including the amount of estimated pass through costs. (ii) The categories of costs that are included in the State system and are reimbursed differently under the State system than under the Medicare system. (iii) The number of Medicare and total base year discharges and admissions for each hospital. (iv) The rate of change factor (and the method of application of this factor) used to project the base year costs over the 36-month period to which the assurance would apply. (v) Any allowance for anticipated growth in the amount of services from the base year (if applicable, the allowance must be presented in separate estimates for population increases or for increases in rates of admissions or both). (vi) Any adjustment in which the State is permitted by CMS to take into account previous reductions in the Medicare payment amounts that were the result of the effectiveness of the State's system even though Medicare was not a part of that system. (vii) Appropriate recognition and projection of the time value of trust fund expenditures for the period the State system expenditures were either less than or exceeded the Medicare system payments. (viii) States applying under a rate of increase effectiveness test under § 403.304(c)(3) must also submit data projecting the parallel rates of increase during the requisite period. (4) The projections must include both the aggregate payments and the payments per discharge for the individual hospitals and for the State as a whole. (5) On a case-by-case basis. CMS may require additional data and documentation as needed to complete its review and monitoring. (6) For existing Medicare demonstration projects in effect on April 20, 1983, the assurance and data as required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, if appropriate, may be based on aggregate payments or payments per inpatient admission or discharge. CMS will judge the effectiveness of these systems on the basis of the rate of increase or inflation in Medicare inpatient hospital payments compared to the national rate of increase or inflation for such payments during the State's hospitals' three cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1983. The data submitted by the State for the period subject to the rate of increase test must include the rate of increase projection for that particular period of time. For the subsequent period of time, the State must assure that payments under its system will not exceed what Medicare payments would have been, as described in § 403.304(c)(3). (7) If the amount of Medicare payments under the State system exceeds what would have been paid under the Medicare reimbursement principles in any given year, the State must also submit quantitative evidence that the system will result in expenditures that do not exceed what Medicare expenditures would have been over the 36 month period beginning with the first month that the State system is operating. For a State that has an existing demonstration project in effect on April 20, 1983, and that elects under § 403.304(c)(3) to have a rate of increase test apply, if the State's rate of increase or inflation exceeds the national rate of increase or inflation in a given year, the State must submit quantitative evidence that, over 36 months, its payments will not exceed the national rate of increase or inflation. Furthermore, if payments under the State's system must be compared to actual Medicare expenditures, at the end of the third cost reporting period, as described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, and payments under the State's system exceed what Medicare would have paid in a given year, the State must submit quantitative evidence that, over 36 months, payments under its system will not exceed what Medicare would have paid. (c) Review of assurances regarding expenditures. CMS will review the State's assurances and data submitted under this section, as a prerequisite to the approval of the State's system. CMS will compare the State's projections of payment amounts to CMS data in order to determine if the State's assurance is reasonable and fully supportable. If the CMS data indicate that the State's system would result in payment amounts that would be more then that which would have been paid under the Medicare principles, the State's assurances would not be acceptable. For States applying in accordance with § 403.308, if CMS data indicate that the State's system would result in a rate of increase or inflation that would be more than the national rate of increase or inflation, the State's assurances would not be acceptable. (d) Medicaid upper limit. In accordance with § 447.253 of this chapter, the State system may not result in aggregate payments for Medicaid inpatient hospital services that would exceed the amount that would have otherwise have been paid under the Medicare principles as applied through the State system. (e) Monitoring of Medicare expenditures. CMS will monitor on a quarterly basis expenditures under the State's system as compared to what Medicare expenditures would have been if the system had not been in effect. If CMS determines at any time that the payments made under the State's system exceed the States' projections, as established by the satisfactory assurances required under § 403.304(c) and, if appropriate, the predetermined percentage relationship of the payments as required under § 403.304(d). CMS will— (1) Conclude that payments under the State system over a 36-month period will exceed what Medicare would have paid: (2) Terminate the waiver; and (3) Recoup overpayments to the affected hospitals in accordance with the procedures described in § 403.310. § 403.321 State systems for hospital outpatient services. CMS may approve a State's application for approval of an outpatient system if the following conditions are met: (a) The State's inpatient system is approved. (b) The State's outpatient application meets the requirements and assurances for an inpatient system described in §§ 403.304 (b) and (c), and 403.306 (b)(1) and (b)(2)(ii). (c) The State submits a separate application that provides separate assurances and estimates and data in further support of its assurance submitted under paragraph (b)(1) of § 403.320, as follows: (1) Upon application for approval, the State must submit estimates and data that include, but are not limited to, projections for the first 12-month period covered by the assurance for each hospital, in both the aggregate and on an average cost per service and payment basis, of Medicare outpatient expenditures under Medicare principles of reimbursement; parallel projections of Medicare outpatient expenditures under the State system; and the resulting cost or savings to Medicare independent of the State system for hospital inpatient services. (2) The State must submit separate statewide projections for each year of the 36-month period of the aggregate outpatient expenditures for each system. The projections submitted under this paragraph must— (i) Comply with the requirements of paragraphs (b) (3) and (5) of § 403.320 regarding a detailed description of the methodology used to derive the expenditure amounts: (ii) Include the data and assumptions set forth in paragraphs (b)(3) (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), and (v) of § 403.320; and (iii) Include any assumption the State has adopted for establishing the number of Medicare and total base year outpatient services for each hospital. (3) The State must provide a detailed explanation of the reasons for any difference between the data or assumptions used for the separate projections. § 403.322 Termination of agreements for Medicare recognition of State systems. (a) Termination of agreements. (1) CMS may terminate any approved agreement if it finds, after the procedures described in this paragraph are followed that the State system does not satisfactorily meet the requirements of section 1886(c) of the Act or the regulations in this subpart. A termination must be effective on the last day of a calendar quarter. (2) CMS will give the State reasonable notice of the proposed termination of an agreement and of the reasons for the termination at least 90 days before the effective date of the termination. (3) CMS will give the State the opportunity to present evidence to refute the finding. (4) CMS will issue a final notice of termination upon a final review and determination on the State's evidence. (b) Termination by State. A State may voluntarily terminate a State system by giving CMS notice of its intent to terminate. A termination must be effective on the last day of a calendar quarter. The State must notify CMS of its intent to terminate at least 90 days before the effective date of the termination. Subparts D—F [Reserved] Subpart G—Religious Nonmedical Health Care Institutions—Benefits, Conditions of Participation, and Payment Source: 64 FR 67047, Nov. 30, 1999, unless otherwise noted. § 403.700 Basis and purpose. This subpart implements sections 1821; 1861(e), (y), and (ss); 1869; and 1878 of the Act regarding Medicare payment for inpatient hospital or posthospital extended care services furnished to eligible beneficiaries in religious nonmedical health care institutions. § 403.702 Definitions and terms. For purposes of this subpart, the following definitions and terms apply: Election means a written statement signed by the beneficiary or the beneficiary's legal representative indicating the beneficiary's choice to receive nonmedical care or treatment for religious reasons. Excepted medical care means medical care that is received involuntarily or required under Federal, State, or local laws. FFY stands for Federal fiscal year. Medical care or treatment means health care furnished by or under the direction of a licensed physician that can involve diagnosing, treating, or preventing disease and other damage to the mind and body. It may involve the use of pharmaceuticals, diet, exercise, surgical intervention, and technical procedures. Nonexcepted medical care means medical care (other than excepted medical care) that is sought by or for a beneficiary who has elected religious nonmedical health care institution services. Religious nonmedical care or religious method of healing means health care furnished under established religious tenets that prohibit conventional or unconventional medical care for the treatment of a beneficiary, and the sole reliance on these religious tenets to fulfill a beneficiary's total health care needs. RNHCI stands for “religious nonmedical health care institution,” as defined in section 1861(ss)(1) of the Act. Religious nonmedical nursing personnel means individuals who are grounded in the religious beliefs of the RNHCI, trained and experienced in the principles of nonmedical care, and formally recognized as competent in the administration of care within their religious nonmedical health care group. § 403.720 Conditions for coverage. Medicare covers services furnished in an RNHCI if the following conditions are met: (a) The provider meets the definition of an RNHCI as defined in section 1861(ss)(1) of the Act. That is, it is an institution that: (1) Is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and is exempt from taxes under section 501(a). (2) Is lawfully operated under all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations. (3) Furnishes only nonmedical nursing items and services to beneficiaries who choose to rely solely upon a religious method of healing and for whom the acceptance of medical services would be inconsistent with their religious beliefs. (4) Furnishes nonmedical items and services exclusively through nonmedical nursing personnel who are experienced in caring for the physical needs of nonmedical patients. (5) Furnishes nonmedical items and services to inpatients on a 24-hour basis. (6) Does not furnish, on the basis of religious beliefs, through its personnel or otherwise medical items and services (including any medical screening, examination, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, or the administration of drugs) for its patients. (7) Is not owned by, is not under common ownership with, or does not have an ownership interest of 5 percent or more in, a provider of medical treatment or services and is not affiliated with a provider of medical treatment or services or with an individual who has an ownership interest of 5 percent or more in, a provider of medical treatment or services. (Permissible affiliations are described at § 403.738(c).) (8) Has in effect a utilization review plan that sets forth the following: (i) Provides for review of the admissions to the institution, the duration of stays, and the need for continuous extended duration of stays in the institution, and the items and services furnished by the institution. (ii) Requires that reviews be made by an appropriate committee of the institution that included the individuals responsible for overall administration and for supervision of nursing personnel at the institution. (iii) Provides that records be maintained of the meetings, decisions, and actions of the review committee. (iv) Meets other requirements as the Secretary finds necessary to establish an effective utilization review plan. (9) Provides information CMS may require to implement section 1821 of the Act, including information relating to quality of care and coverage decisions. (10) Meets other requirements CMS finds necessary in the interest of the health and safety of the patients who receive services in the institution. These requirements are the conditions of participation in this subpart. (b) The provider meets the conditions of participation cited in §§ 403.730 through 403.746. (A provider may be deemed to meet conditions of participation in accordance with part 488 of this chapter.) (c) The provider has a valid provider agreement as a hospital with CMS in accordance with part 489 of this chapter and for payment purposes is classified as an extended care hospital. (d) The beneficiary has a condition that would make him or her eligible to receive services covered under Medicare Part A as an inpatient in a hospital or SNF. (e) The beneficiary has a valid election as described in § 403.724 in effect for Medicare covered services furnished in an RNHCI. § 403.724 Valid election requirements. (a) General requirements. An election statement must be made by the Medicare beneficiary or his or her legal representative. (1) The election must be a written statement that must include the following statements: (i) The beneficiary is conscientiously opposed to acceptance of nonexcepted medical treatment. (ii) The beneficiary acknowledges that the acceptance of nonexcepted medical treatment is inconsistent with his or her sincere religious beliefs. (iii) The beneficiary acknowledges that the receipt of nonexcepted medical treatment constitutes a revocation of the election and may limit further receipt of services in an RNHCI. (iv) The beneficiary acknowledges that the election may be revoked by submitting a written statement to CMS. (v) The beneficiary acknowledges that revocation of the election will not prevent or delay access to medical services available under Medicare Part A in facilities other than RNHCIs. (2) The election must be signed and dated by the beneficiary or his or her legal representative. (3) The election must be notarized. (4) The RNHCI must keep a copy of the election statement on file and submit the original to CMS with any information obtained regarding prior elections or revocations. (5) The election becomes effective on the date it is signed. (6) The election remains in effect until revoked. (b) Revocation of election. (1) A beneficiary's election is revoked by one of the following: (i) The beneficiary receives nonexcepted medical treatment for which Medicare payment is requested. (ii) The beneficiary voluntarily revokes the election and notifies CMS in writing. (2) The receipt of excepted medical treatment as defined in § 403.702 does not revoke the election made by a beneficiary. (c) Limitation on subsequent elections. (1) If a beneficiary's election has been made and revoked twice, the following limitations on subsequent elections apply: (i) The third election is not effective until 1 year after the date of the most recent revocation. (ii) Any succeeding elections are not effective until 5 years after the date of the most recent revocation. (2) CMS will not accept as the basis for payment of any claim any elections executed on or after January 1 of the calendar year in which the sunset provision described in § 403.756 becomes effective. § 403.730 Condition of participation: Patient rights. An RNHCI must protect and promote each patient's rights. (a) Standard: Notice of rights. The RNHCI must do the following: (1) Inform each patient of his or her rights in advance of furnishing patient care. (2) Have a process for prompt resolution of grievances, including a specific person within the facility whom a patient may contact to file a grievance. In addition, the facility must provide patients with information about the facility's process as well as with contact information for appropriate State and Federal resources. (b) Standard: Exercise of rights. The patient has the right to: (1) Be informed of his or her rights and to participate in the development and implementation of his or her plan of care. (2) Make decisions regarding his or her care, including transfer and discharge from the RNHCI. (See § 403.736 for discharge and transfer requirements.) (3) Formulate advance directives and expect staff who furnish care in the RNHCI to comply with those directives, in accordance with part 489, subpart I of this chapter. For purposes of conforming with the requirement in § 489.102 that there be documentation in the patient's medical records concerning advanced directives, the patient care records of a beneficiary in an RNHCI are equivalent to medical records held by other providers. (c) Standard: Privacy and safety. The patient has the right to the following: (1) Personal privacy. (2) Care in a safe setting. (3) Freedom from verbal, psychological, and physical abuse, and misappropriation of property. (4) Freedom from the use of restraints. (5) Freedom from involuntary seclusion. (d) Standard: Confidentiality of patient records. For any patient care records or election information it maintains on patients, the RNHCI must establish procedures to do the following: (1) Safeguard the privacy of any information that identifies a particular patient. Information from, or copies of, records may be released only to authorized individuals, and the RNHCI must ensure that unauthorized individuals cannot gain access to or alter patient records. Original patient care records must be released only in accordance with Federal or State laws, court orders, or subpoenas. (2) Maintain the records and information in an accurate and timely manner. (3) Ensure timely access by patients to the records and other information that pertains to that patient. (4) Abide by all Federal and State laws regarding confidentiality and disclosure for patient care records and election information. § 403.732 Condition of participation: Quality assessment and performance improvement. The RNHCI must develop, implement, and maintain a quality assessment and performance improvement program. (a) Standard: Program scope. (1) The quality assessment and performance improvement program must include, but is not limited to, measures to evaluate: (i) Access to care. (ii) Patient satisfaction. (iii) Staff performance. (iv) Complaints and grievances. (v) Discharge planning activities. (vi) Safety issues, including physical environment. (2) In each of the areas listed in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, and any other areas the RNHCI includes, the RNHCI must do the following: (i) Define quality assessment and performance improvement measures. (ii) Describe and outline quality assessment and performance improvement activities appropriate for the services furnished by or in the RNHCI. (iii) Measure, analyze, and track performance that reflect care and RNHCI processes. (iv) Inform all patients, in writing, of the scope and responsibilities of the quality assessment and performance improvement program. (3) The RNHCI must set priorities for performance improvement, considering the prevalence of and severity of identified problems. (4) The RNHCI must act to make performance improvements and must track performance to assure that improvements are sustained. (b) Standard: Program responsibilities. (1) The governing body, administration, and staff are responsible for ensuring that the quality assessment and performance improvement program addresses identified priorities in the RNHCI and are responsible for the development, implementation, maintenance, and performance improvement of assessment actions. (2) The RNHCI must include all programs, departments, functions, and contracted services when developing, implementing, maintaining, and evaluating the program of quality assessment and performance improvement. § 403.734 Condition of participation: Food services. The RNHCI must have an organized food service that is directed and adequately staffed by qualified personnel. (a) Standard: Sanitary conditions. The RNHCI must furnish food to the patient that is obtained, stored, prepared, distributed, and served under sanitary conditions. (b) Standard: Meals. The RNHCI must serve meals that furnish each patient with adequate nourishment in accordance with the recommended dietary allowances of the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences. The RNHCI must do the following: (1) Furnish food that is palatable, attractive, and at the proper temperature and consistency. (2) Offer substitutes of similar nourishment to patients who refuse food served or desire alternative choices. (3) Furnish meals at regular times comparable to normal mealtimes in the community. There must be no more than 14 hours between a substantial evening meal and breakfast the following day. (4) The RNHCI must offer snacks at bedtime. § 403.736 Condition of participation: Discharge planning. (a) Discharge planning and instructions. The RNHCI must have in effect a discharge planning process that applies to all patients. The process must assure that appropriate post-institution services are obtained for each patient, as necessary. The RNHCI must assess the need for a discharge plan for any patient likely to suffer adverse consequences if there is no planning. (1) Discharge instructions must be provided at the time of discharge to the patient or the patient's caregiver as necessary. (2) If the patient assessment indicates a need for a discharge plan, the discharge plan must include instructions on post-RNHCI care to be used by the patient or the caregiver in the patient's home, as identified in the discharge plan. (3) If the RNHCI's patient assessment does not indicate a need for a discharge plan, the beneficiary or his or her legal representative may request a discharge plan. In this case, the RNHCI must develop a discharge plan for the beneficiary. (b) Standard: Transfer or referral. The RNHCI must transfer or refer patients in a timely manner to another facility (including a medical facility if requested by the beneficiary, or his or her legal representative) in accordance with § 403.730(b)(2). (c) Standard: Reassessment. The RNHCI must reassess its discharge planning process on an ongoing basis. The reassessment must include a review of discharge plans to ensure that they are responsive to discharge needs. [64 FR 67047, Nov. 30, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 66720, Nov. 28, 2003; 84 FR 51813, Sept. 30, 2019] § 403.738 Condition of participation: Administration. An RNHCI must have written policies regarding its organization, services, and administration. (a) Standard: Compliance with Federal, State, and local laws. The RNHCI must operate in compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, regulations, and codes including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the following: (1) Protection against discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, or handicap (45 CFR parts 80, 84, and 91). (2) Protection of human research subjects (45 CFR part 46). (3) Application of all safeguards to protect against the possibility of fraud and abuse (42 CFR part 455). (4) Privacy of individually identifiable health information (45 CFR part 164). (b) Standard: Governing body. (1) The RNHCI must have a governing body, or a person designated to function as a governing body, that is legally responsible for establishing and implementing all policies regarding the RNHCI's management and operation. (2) The governing body must appoint the administrator responsible for the management of the RNHCI. (c) Standard: Affiliations and disclosure. (1) An affiliation is permissible if it is between one of the following: (i) An individual serving as an uncompensated director, trustee, officer, or other member of the governing body of an RNHCI and a provider of medical treatment or services. (ii) An individual who is a director, trustee, officer, employee, or staff member of an RNHCI and another individual, with whom he or she has a family relationship, who is affiliated with (or has an ownership interest in) a provider of medical treatment or services. (iii) The RNHCI and an individual or entity furnishing goods or services as a vendor to both providers of medical treatment or services and RNHCIs. (2) The RNHCI complies with the disclosure requirements of §§ 420.206 and 455.104 of this chapter. (3) The RNHCI furnishes written notice, including the identity of each new individual or company, to CMS at the time of a change, if a change occurs in any of the following: (i) Persons with an ownership or control interest, as defined in §§ 420.201 and 455.101 of this chapter. (ii) The officers, directors, agents, or managing employees. (iii) The religious entity, corporation, association, or other company responsible for the management of the RNHCI. (iv) The RNHCI's administrator or director of nonmedical nursing services. [64 FR 67047, Nov. 30, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 66720, Nov. 28, 2003] § 403.740 Condition of participation: Staffing. The RNHCI must be staffed with qualified experienced personnel who are present in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the patients. (a) Standard: Personnel qualifications. The RNHCI must ensure that staff who supervise or furnish services to patients are qualified to do so and that staff allowed to practice without direct supervision have specific training to furnish these services. (b) Standard: Education, training, and performance evaluation. (1) The RNHCI must ensure that staff (including contractors and other individuals working under arrangement) have the necessary education and training concerning their duties so that they can furnish services competently. This education includes, but is not limited to, training related to the individual job description, performance expectations, applicable organizational policies and procedures, and safety responsibilities. (2) Staff must demonstrate, in practice, the skills and techniques necessary to perform their duties and responsibilities. (3) The RNHCI must evaluate the performance of staff and implement measures for improvement. § 403.742 Condition of participation: Physical environment. A RNHCI must be designed, constructed, and maintained to ensure the safety of the patients, staff, and the public. (a) Standard: Buildings. The physical plant and the overall environment must be maintained in a manner that ensures the safety and well-being of the patients. The RNHCI must have the following: (1) Procedures for the proper storage and disposal of trash. (2) Proper ventilation and temperature control and appropriate lighting levels to ensure a safe and secure environment. (3) An effective pest control program. (4) A preventive maintenance program to maintain essential mechanical, electrical, and fire protection equipment operating in an efficient and safe manner. (5) A working call system for patients to summon aid or assistance. (b) Standard: Patient rooms. Patient rooms must be designed and equipped for adequate care, comfort, and privacy of the patient. (1) Patient rooms must meet the following conditions: (i) Accommodate no more than four patients. (ii) Measure at least 80 square feet per patient in multiple patient rooms and at least 100 square feet in single patient rooms. (iii) Have direct access to an exit corridor. (iv) Be designed or equipped to assure full visual privacy for each patient. (v) Have at least one window to the outside. (vi) Have a floor at or above grade level. (2) The RNHCI must furnish each patient with the following: (i) A separate bed of proper size and height for the convenience of the patient. (ii) A clean, comfortable mattress. (iii) Bedding appropriate to the weather and climate. (iv) Functional furniture appropriate to the patient's needs and individual closet space with clothes racks and shelves accessible to the patient. (3) CMS may permit variances in requirements specified in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section relating to rooms on an individual basis when the RNHCI adequately demonstrates in writing that the variances meet the following: (i) Are in accordance with the special needs of the patients. (ii) Will not adversely affect patients' health and safety. [64 FR 67047, Nov. 30, 1999, as amended at 81 FR 64021, Sept. 16, 2016] § 403.744 Condition of participation: Life safety from fire. (a) General. An RNHCI must meet the following conditions: (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section— (i) The RNHCI must meet the applicable provisions and must proceed in accordance with the Life Safety Code (NFPA 101 and Tentative Interim Amendments TIA 12-1, TIA 12-2, TIA 12-3, and TIA 12-4). (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section, corridor doors and doors to rooms containing flammable or combustible materials must be provided with positive latching hardware. Roller latches are prohibited on such doors. (2) The RNHCI must have written fire control plans that contain provisions for prompt reporting of fires; extinguishing fires; protection of patients, staff, and the public; evacuation; and cooperation with fire fighting authorities. (3) The RNHCI must maintain written evidence of regular inspection and approval by State or local fire control agencies. (4) The RNHCI may place alcohol-based hand rub dispensers in its facility if the dispensers are installed in a manner that adequately protects against inappropriate access. (5) When a sprinkler system is shut down for more than 10 hours the RHNCI must: (i) Evacuate the building or portion of the building affected by the system outage until the system is back in service, or (ii) Establish a fire watch until the system is back in service. (6) Building must have an outside window or outside door in every sleeping room, and for any building constructed after July 5, 2016 the sill height must not exceed 36 inches above the floor. Windows in atrium walls are considered outside windows for the purposes of this requirement. (b) Exceptions. (1) In consideration of a recommendation by the State survey agency or Accrediting Organization, or at the discretion of the Secretary, may waive, for periods deemed appropriate, specific provisions of the Life Safety Code, which would result in unreasonable hardship upon a RNHCI facility, but only if the waiver will not adversely affect the health and safety of the patients. (2) If CMS finds that the fire and safety code imposed by State law adequately protects patients in the institution, the provisions of the Life Safety Code required in paragraph (a)(1) of this section do not apply in that State. (c) The standards incorporated by reference in this section are approved for incorporation by reference by the Director of the Office of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. You may inspect a copy at the CMS Information Resource Center, 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html. If any changes in this edition of the Code are incorporated by reference, CMS will publish a document in the Federal Register to announce the changes. (1) National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169, www.nfpa.org , 1.617.770.3000. (i) NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2012 edition, issued August 11, 2011; (ii) TIA 12-1 to NFPA 101, issued August 11, 2011. (iii) TIA 12-2 to NFPA 101, issued October 30, 2012. (iv) TIA 12-3 to NFPA 101, issued October 22, 2013. (v) TIA 12-4 to NFPA 101, issued October 22, 2013. (2) [Reserved] [64 FR 67047, Nov. 30, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 1385, Jan. 10, 2003; 69 FR 18803, Apr. 9, 2004; 69 FR 49240, Aug. 11, 2004; 70 FR 15237, Mar. 25, 2005; 70 FR 71007, Nov. 25, 2005; 71 FR 55339, Sept. 22, 2006; 81 FR 26896, May 4, 2016] § 403.745 Condition of participation: Building safety. (a) Standard: Building Safety. Except as otherwise provided in this section the RNHCI must meet the applicable provisions and must proceed in accordance with the Health Care Facilities Code (NFPA 99 and Tentative Interim Amendments TIA 12-2, TIA 12-3, TIA 12-4, TIA 12-5 and TIA 12-6). (b) Standard: Exceptions. Chapters 7, 8, 12, and 13 of the adopted Health Care Facilities Code do not apply to a RNHCI. (c) Waiver. If application of the Health Care Facilities Code required under paragraph (a) of this section would result in unreasonable hardship for the RNHCI, CMS may waive specific provisions of the Health Care Facilities Code, but only if the waiver does not adversely affect the health and safety of individuals. (d) Incorporation by reference. The standards incorporated by reference in this section are approved for incorporation by reference by the Director of the Office of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. You may inspect a copy at the CMS Information Resource Center, 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html. If any changes in this edition of the Code are incorporated by reference, CMS will publish a document in the Federal Register to announce the changes. (1) National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169, www.nfpa.org , 1.617.770.3000. (i) NFPA 99, Standards for Health Care Facilities Code of the National Fire Protection Association 99, 2012 edition, issued August 11, 2011. (ii) TIA 12-2 to NFPA 99, issued August 11, 2011. (iii) TIA 12-3 to NFPA 99, issued August 9, 2012. (iv) TIA 12-4 to NFPA 99, issued March 7, 2013. (v) TIA 12-5 to NFPA 99, issued August 1, 2013. (vi) TIA 12-6 to NFPA 99, issued March 3, 2014. (2) [Reserved] [81 FR 26896, May 4, 2016] § 403.746 Condition of participation: Utilization review. The RNHCI must have in effect a written utilization review plan to assess the necessity of services furnished. The plan must provide that records be maintained of all meetings, decisions, and actions by the utilization review committee. (a) Standard: Utilization review plan. The utilization review plan must contain written procedures for evaluating the following: (1) Admissions. (2) Duration of care. (3) Continuing care of an extended duration. (4) Items and services furnished. (b) Standard: Utilization review committee. The committee is responsible for evaluating each admission and ensuring that the admission is necessary and appropriate. The utilization review plan must be carried out by the utilization review committee, consisting of the governing body, administrator or other individual responsible for the overall administration of the RNHCI, the supervisor of nursing staff, and other staff as appropriate. (c) Standard: Utilization review committee role in RNHCI home services. In addition to the requirements in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, the utilization review committee is responsible for: (1) The admission, and at least every 30 days, the continued care review of each patient in the RHNCI home services program. (2) Oversight and monitoring of the home services program, including the purchase and utilization of designated durable medical equipment items for beneficiaries in the program. [64 FR 67047, Nov. 30, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 66419, Nov. 15, 2004] § 403.748 Condition of participation: Emergency preparedness. The Religious Nonmedical Health Care Institution (RNHCI) must comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local emergency preparedness requirements. The RNHCI must establish and maintain an emergency preparedness program that meets the requirements of this section. The emergency preparedness program must include, but not be limited to, the following elements: (a) Emergency plan. The RNHCI must develop and maintain an emergency preparedness plan that must be reviewed, and updated at least every 2 years. The plan must do all of the following: (1) Be based on and include a documented, facility-based and community-based risk assessment, utilizing an all-hazards approach. (2) Include strategies for addressing emergency events identified by the risk assessment. (3) Address patient population, including, but not limited to, persons at-risk; the type of services the RNHCI has the ability to provide in an emergency; and, continuity of operations, including delegations of authority and succession plans. (4) Include a process for cooperation and collaboration with local, tribal, regional, State, and Federal emergency preparedness officials' efforts to maintain an integrated response during a disaster or emergency situation. (b) Policies and procedures. The RNHCI must develop and implement emergency preparedness policies and procedures, based on the emergency plan set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, risk assessment at paragraph (a)(1) of this section, and the communication plan at paragraph (c) of this section. The policies and procedures must be reviewed and updated at least every 2 years. At a minimum, the policies and procedures must address the following: (1) The provision of subsistence needs for staff and patients, whether they evacuate or shelter in place, include, but are not limited to the following: (i) Food, water, and supplies. (ii) Alternate sources of energy to maintain the following: (A) Temperatures to protect patient health and safety and for the safe and sanitary storage of provisions. (B) Emergency lighting. (C) Fire detection, extinguishing, and alarm systems. (D) Sewage and waste disposal. (2) A system to track the location of on-duty staff and sheltered patients in the RNHCI's care during an emergency. If on-duty staff and sheltered patients are relocated during the emergency, the RNCHI must document the specific name and location of the receiving facility or other location. (3) Safe evacuation from the RNHCI, which includes the following: (i) Consideration of care needs of evacuees. (ii) Staff responsibilities. (iii) Transportation. (iv) Identification of evacuation location(s). (v) Primary and alternate means of communication with external sources of assistance. (4) A means to shelter in place for patients, staff, and volunteers who remain in the facility. (5) A system of care documentation that does the following: (i) Preserves patient information. (ii) Protects confidentiality of patient information. (iii) Secures and maintains the availability of records. (6) The use of volunteers in an emergency and other emergency staffing strategies to address surge needs during an emergency. (7) The development of arrangements with other RNHCIs and other providers to receive patients in the event of limitations or cessation of operations to maintain the continuity of nonmedical services to RNHCI patients. (8) The role of the RNHCI under a waiver declared by the Secretary, in accordance with section 1135 of Act, in the provision of care at an alternate care site identified by emergency management officials. (c) Communication plan. The RNHCI must develop and maintain an emergency preparedness communication plan that complies with Federal, State, and local laws and must be reviewed and updated at least every 2 years. The communication plan must include all of the following: (1) Names and contact information for the following: (i) Staff. (ii) Entities providing services under arrangement. (iii) Next of kin, guardian or custodian. (iv) Other RNHCIs. (v) Volunteers. (2) Contact information for the following: (i) Federal, State, tribal, regional, and local emergency preparedness staff. (ii) Other sources of assistance. (3) Primary and alternate means for communicating with the following: (i) RNHCI's staff. (ii) Federal, State, tribal, regional, and local emergency management agencies. (4) A method for sharing information and care documentation for patients under the RNHCI's care, as necessary, with care providers to maintain the continuity of care, based on the written election statement made by the patient or his or her legal representative. (5) A means, in the event of an evacuation, to release patient information as permitted under 45 CFR 164.510(b)(1)(ii). (6) A means of providing information about the general condition and location of patients under the facility's care as permitted under 45 CFR 164.510(b)(4). (7) A means of providing information about the RNHCI's occupancy, needs, and its ability to provide assistance, to the authority having jurisdiction, the Incident Command Center, or designee. (d) Training and testing. The RNHCI must develop and maintain an emergency preparedness training and testing program that is based on the emergency plan set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, risk assessment at paragraph (a)(1) of this section, policies and procedures at paragraph (b) of this section, and the communication plan at paragraph (c) of this section. The training and testing program must be reviewed and updated at least every 2 years. (1) Training program. The RNHCI must do all of the following: (i) Initial training in emergency preparedness policies and procedures to all new and existing staff, individuals providing services under arrangement, and volunteers, consistent with their expected roles. (ii) Provide emergency preparedness training at least every 2 years. (iii) Maintain documentation of all emergency preparedness training. (iv) Demonstrate staff knowledge of emergency procedures. (v) If the emergency preparedness policies and procedures are significantly updated, the RNHCI must conduct training on the updated policies and procedures. (2) Testing. The RNHCI must conduct exercises to test the emergency plan. The RNHCI must do the following: (i) Conduct a paper-based, tabletop exercise at least annually. A tabletop exercise is a group discussion led by a facilitator, using a narrated, clinically-relevant emergency scenario, and a set of problem statements, directed messages, or prepared questions designed to challenge an emergency plan. (ii) Analyze the RNHCI's response to and maintain documentation of all tabletop exercises, and emergency events, and revise the RNHCI's emergency plan, as needed. [81 FR 64021, Sept. 16, 2016, as amended at 84 FR 51813, Sept. 30, 2019] § 403.750 Estimate of expenditures and adjustments. (a) Estimates. CMS estimates the level of expenditures for services provided under this subpart before the start of each FFY beginning with FFY 2000. (b) Adjustments to payments. When the level of estimated expenditures is projected to exceed the FFY trigger level as described in paragraph (d) of this section, for the year of the projection, payments to RNHCIs will be reduced by a proportional percentage to prevent estimated expenditures from exceeding the trigger level. In addition to reducing payments proportionally, CMS may impose alternative adjustments. (c) Notification of adjustments. CMS notifies participating RNHCIs before the start of the FFY of the type and level of expenditure reductions to be made and when these adjustments will apply. (d) Calculation of trigger level. The trigger level for FFY 1998 is $20,000,000. For subsequent FFYs, the trigger level is the unadjusted trigger level increased or decreased by the carry forward as described in § 403.754(b). The unadjusted trigger level is the base year amount (the unadjusted trigger level dollar amount for the prior FFY) increased by the average consumer price index (the single numerical value published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics that presents the relationship in United States urban areas for the current cost of goods and services compared to a base year, to represent the change in spending power) for the 12-month period ending on July 31 preceding the beginning of the FFY. § 403.752 Payment provisions. (a) Payment to RNHCIs. Payment for services may be made to an RNHCI that meets the conditions for coverage described in § 403.720 and the conditions of participation described in §§ 403.730 through 403.746. Payment is made in accordance with § 413.40 of this chapter to an RNHCI meeting these conditions. (b) Review of estimates and adjustments. There is no administrative or judicial review of the level of estimated expenditures or the adjustments in payments described in § 403.750(a) and (b). (c) Effect on beneficiary liability. When payments are reduced in accordance with § 403.750(b), the RNHCI may bill the beneficiary the amount of the Medicare reduction attributable to his or her covered services. (d) Notification of beneficiary liability. (1) The RNHCI must notify the beneficiary in writing at the time of admission of any proposed or current proportional Medicare adjustment. A beneficiary currently receiving care in the RNHCI must be notified in writing at least 30 days before the Medicare reduction is to take effect. The notification must inform the beneficiary that the RNHCI can bill him or her for the proportional Medicare adjustment. (2) The RNHCI must, at time of billing, provide the beneficiary with his or her liability for payment, based on a calculation of the Medicare reduction pertaining to the beneficiary's covered services permitted by § 403.750(b). § 403.754 Monitoring expenditure level. (a) Tracking expenditures. Starting in FFY 1999 CMS begins monitoring Medicare payments to RNHCIs. (b) Carry forward. The difference between the trigger level and Medicare expenditures for a FFY results in a carry forward that either increases or decreases the unadjusted trigger level described in § 403.750(d). In no case may the carry forward exceed $50,000,000 for an FFY. § 403.756 Sunset provision. (a) Effective date. Beginning with FFY 2002, if the level of estimated expenditures for all RNHCIs exceeds the trigger level for 3 consecutive FFYs, CMS will not accept as the basis for payment of any claim any election executed on or after January 1 of the following calendar year. (b) Notice of activation. A notice in the Federal Register will be published at least 60 days before January 1 of the calendar year that the sunset provision becomes effective. (c) Effects of sunset provision. Only those beneficiaries who have a valid election in effect before January 1 of the year in which the sunset provision becomes effective will be able to claim Medicare payment for care in an RNHCI, and only for RNCHI services furnished during that election. § 403.764 Basis and purpose of religious nonmedical health care institutions providing home service. (a) Basis. This subpart implements sections 1821, 1861, 1861(e), 1861(m), 1861(y), 1861(ss) and 1861(aaa), 1869 and 1878 of the Act regarding Medicare payment for items and services provided in the home setting furnished to eligible beneficiaries by religious nonmedical health care institutions (RNHCIs). (b) Purpose. The home benefit provides for limited durable medical equipment (DME) items and RNHCI services in the home setting that are fiscally limited to $700,000 per calendar year, with an expiration date of December 31, 2006, or the date on which the 2006 spending limit is reached. [69 FR 66419, Nov. 15, 2004] § 403.766 Requirements for coverage and payment of RNHCI home services. (a) Medicare Part A pays for RNHCI home services if the RNHCI provider does the following: (1) Submit a notice of intent to CMS to exercise the option of providing home service. (2) Provide RNHCI services to eligible beneficiaries, (3) Arrange with suppliers to furnish appropriate DME items as required to meet documented eligible beneficiary needs. (4) Arrange for RNHCI nurse home visits to eligible beneficiaries. (5) Have a utilization committee that assumes the additional responsibility for the oversight and monitoring of the items and RNHCI nursing services provided under the home benefit. (6) Meet all applicable requirements set forth in subpart G of this part. (b) To be an eligible beneficiary to RNHCI home services the beneficiary must: (1) Have an effective election in place. (2) Be confined to the home, as specified in § 409.42(a) of this chapter. (3) Have a condition that makes him or her eligible to receive services covered under Medicare home health. (4) Receive home services and DME items from a RNHCI. (5) Be responsible for deductible and coinsurance for DME, as specified in § 409.50 of this chapter. [69 FR 66419, Nov. 15, 2004, as amended at 70 FR 16721, Apr. 1, 2005] § 403.768 Excluded services. In addition to items and services excluded in § 409.49 of this chapter, items and services are also excluded if they are provided by: (a) A HHA that is not a RNHCI. (b) A supplier who is not providing RNHCI designated items under arrangement with a RNHCI. (c) A nurse who is not providing RNHCI home nursing services under arrangement with a RNHCI. [69 FR 66419, Nov. 15, 2004] § 403.770 Payments for home services. (a) The RNHCI nursing visits are paid at the modified low utilization payment adjusted (LUPA) rate used under the home health prospective payment system at § 484.230 of this chapter. (b) Appropriate DME items are paid as priced by Medicare, minus the deductible and coinsurance liability of the beneficiary. [69 FR 66419, Nov. 15, 2004] Subpart H—Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program Source: 68 FR 69915, Dec. 15, 2003, unless otherwise noted. § 403.800 Basis and scope. (a) Basis. This subpart is based on section 1860D-31 of the Social Security Act (the Act). (b) Scope. This subpart sets forth the standards and procedures CMS uses to implement the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program. § 403.802 Definitions. For purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply: Affiliated organization means an organization that is a legally separate entity from the endorsed drug card sponsor and meets one of the following conditions: (1) The organization and the endorsed drug card sponsor are under common control. Common control exists if another entity has the power, directly or indirectly, to significantly influence or direct the actions or policies of the organization and the endorsed drug card sponsor. (2) The organization is under the control of the endorsed drug card sponsor or the organization controls the endorsed drug card sponsor. Control exists if an entity has the power, directly or indirectly, to significantly influence or direct the actions or policies of another entity. (3) The organization possesses an ownership or equity interest of 5 percent or more in the endorsed drug card sponsor on both the date on which the endorsed drug card sponsor markets the organization's Part D plan, and the date on which the endorsed drug card sponsor signed its endorsement contract with CMS. Annual coordinated election period means the period beginning on November 15, 2004 and ending on December 31, 2004, during which a discount card enrollee may elect to disenroll from their current endorsed discount card program and elect enrollment in another endorsed discount card program effective January 1, 2005. Applicant means the non-governmental, single legal organization or entity doing business in the United States that is applying for Medicare endorsement of its prescription drug discount card program, as described in its application, to be operated by itself or in coordination with subcontractors. Application means the document submitted to CMS by an applicant that seeks to demonstrate the applicant's compliance with the requirements specified in this subpart in order to obtain Medicare endorsement of the applicant's prescription drug discount card program. Authorized representative means a person with legal authority to act on behalf of an individual in making decisions related to the individual's health care or the individual's enrollment in, disenrollment from, and access to negotiated prices and transitional assistance under the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program. Covered discount card drug means any of the following: a drug that may be dispensed only upon a prescription and that is described in sections 1927(k)(2)(A)(i) through (iii) of the Act; a biological product described in sections 1927(k)(2)(B)(i) through (iii) of the Act; insulin described in section 1927(k)(2)(C) of the Act; the following medical supplies associated with the injection of insulin: syringes, needles, alcohol swabs, and gauze; a vaccine licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act; or any use of a covered discount card drug for a medically accepted indication (as defined in section 1927(k)(6) of the Act). The definition of covered discount card drug excludes the following: agents when used for anorexia, weight loss, or weight gain; agents when used to promote fertility; agents when used for cosmetic purposes or hair growth; agents when used for the symptomatic relief of cough and colds; prescription vitamins and mineral products, except prenatal vitamins and fluoride preparations; nonprescription drugs; outpatient drugs for which the manufacturer seeks to require that associated tests or monitoring services be purchased exclusively from the manufacturer or its designee as a condition of sale; barbiturates; and benzodiazepines. Discount card enrollee or enrollee or card enrollee means an individual described in § 403.810(a) who elects to enroll in a Medicare-endorsed prescription drug discount card program. Effective date means the date on which an enrollment or disenrollment transaction becomes effective. Enrollment period means the period beginning on the initial enrollment date and ending on December 31, 2005. Exclusive card program means an endorsed discount card program that is offered by an exclusive card sponsor. Exclusive card sponsor means an endorsed sponsor that also operates one or more Medicare managed care plans and limits enrollment in its endorsed discount card program to individuals described in § 403.810(a) who are enrollees in one of the Medicare managed care plans it offers. Family size means one for individuals who are single, and two for individuals who are married. Federal Employee's Health Benefits Program plan means a plan under chapter 89 of title 5 of the United States Code including the Retired Federal Employee's Health Benefits Program. Formulary means the list of specific drugs from among covered discount card drugs for which an endorsed sponsor offers negotiated prices to Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in its Medicare-endorsed prescription drug discount card program. Group enrollment means simultaneous enrollment of all or some of the individuals described in section 403.810(a) who are members of a Medicare managed care plan into the exclusive card program offered by the Medicare managed care organization. HIPAA means the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, 42 U.S.C. 1320d and section 264 of Public Law 104-191. Income means the components of an individual's adjusted gross income (AGI), as defined under 26 U.S.C. section 62, and, to the extent not included in the components of AGI, retirement and disability benefits, or, if he or she is married, the sum of such income for the individual and his or her spouse. Initial enrollment date means the date established by the Secretary on which endorsed sponsors may begin accepting beneficiaries' standard enrollment forms. Initial enrollment year means the period beginning on the initial enrollment date and ending on December 31, 2004. I/T/U pharmacy means a pharmacy operated by the Indian Health Service, an Indian tribe or tribal organization, or an urban Indian organization, all of which are defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, 25 U.S.C. 1603. Long-term care facility means a skilled nursing facility, as defined in section 1819(a) of the Act, or nursing facility, as defined in section 1919(a) of the Act. Long-term care pharmacy means a pharmacy owned by or under contract with a long-term care facility to provide prescription drugs to the facility's residents. Medicare cost plan means an organization that offers enrollment under a reasonable cost reimbursement contract under section 1876(h) of the Act. Medicare managed care organization means a Part C organization offering a Part C plan described in section 1851(a)(2)(A) of the Act or a Medicare cost plan. Medicare managed care plan means a plan described in section 1851(a)(2)(A) of the Act offered by a Part C organization or a Medicare cost plan. Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program or Medicare Drug Discount Card Program means the program established under section 1860D-31 of the Act. Medicare-endorsed prescription drug discount card program, or endorsed program, or endorsed discount card program means any prescription drug discount card program that has received Medicare endorsement and whose endorsed sponsor has entered into a contract with CMS. Medicare-endorsed prescription drug discount card sponsor, or endorsed sponsor, or endorsed discount card sponsor means any applicant that has received endorsement from Medicare and entered into a contract with CMS to operate an approved Medicare-endorsed discount card program. Negotiated price means the discounted price for a covered discount card drug offered by an endorsed sponsor, including any dispensing fee, which takes into account negotiated price concessions, such as discounts, direct or indirect subsidies, rebates, and direct or indirect remunerations. Network pharmacy means a licensed pharmacy that is not a mail order pharmacy and that is under contract with an endorsed sponsor to provide negotiated prices to its card enrollees and accept transitional assistance as payment for covered discount card drugs provided to its transitional assistance enrollees. New Medicare managed care organization means an entity applying for approval to enter into a new contract with CMS to offer a new, coordinated care plan or plans as described in section 1851(a)(2)(A) of the Act under Medicare Part C and an exclusive card program under the Medicare Drug Discount Card Program. Over-the-counter drug means a non-prescription drug. Part C organization means an organization offering a Part C plan. Part C plan means a plan described in section 1859(b)(1) of the Act. Part D plan has the meaning given the term at § 423.4. Pharmacy network means the group of network pharmacies under contract with an endorsed sponsor. Poverty line means the income level defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act, 42 U.S.C. 9902(2), including any revision required by such section, applicable to the family size involved. Rural means a five-digit zip code in which the population density is less than 1000 persons per square mile. Second enrollment year means the period beginning on January 1, 2005 and ending on December 31, 2005. Solicitation means the application materials identified in the notice CMS publishes in the Federal Register announcing its intention to accept and consider applications from applicants seeking Medicare endorsement for their prescription drug discount card programs. Special election period means the period beginning the day after the effective date of an individual's disenrollment from an endorsed discount card program for one of the reasons listed in § 403.811(b)(2). The length of any given election period will be specified by CMS in a form and manner that supports the goals of the Medicare Drug Discount Card Program. Special endorsed sponsor means an endorsed sponsor who has received special endorsement by CMS. Special endorsement means an endorsement granted under § 403.816 or § 403.817. Standard enrollment form means an enrollment form or other approved process for enrolling individuals into an endorsed program that incorporates the standard elements provided by CMS. Subcontractor means an organization or entity doing business in the United States with which an applicant or endorsed sponsor enters into a contract or other legal arrangement in connection with the operation of a prescription drug discount card program. Suburban means a five-digit zip code in which the population density is between 1000 and 3000 persons per square mile. Transition period means the period beginning on January 1, 2006 and ending, for individuals enrolled for coverage under Part D, on the effective date of the individual's coverage, and for individuals not so enrolled, on the last day of the initial Part D open enrollment period. Transitional assistance means a subsidy that transitional assistance enrollees may apply toward the cost of covered discount card drugs in the manner described in § 403.808(d). Transitional assistance effective date means the date on which a transitional assistance enrollee can access transitional assistance. Transitional assistance enrollee means an individual described in § 403.810(b) who has applied for and been determined eligible for transitional assistance and has enrolled in a discount card program. Urban means a five-digit zip code in which the population density is greater than 3000 persons per square mile. [68 FR 69915, Dec. 15, 2003, as amended at 70 FR 52022, Sept. 1, 2005] § 403.804 General rules for solicitation, application and Medicare endorsement period. (a) Application. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, an applicant must submit an application to CMS by the deadline announced in the solicitation to be eligible for Medicare endorsement of its prescription drug discount card program. The applicant must certify that based on best knowledge, information, and belief, the reported information is accurate, complete, truthful, and supportable. (2) A new Medicare managed care organization may simultaneously apply to offer a new Part C plan or plans and an exclusive card program after the deadline announced in the solicitation. New Medicare managed care organizations seeking endorsement of their prescription drug discount card programs must submit an application to CMS at the time that they submit their Part C applications. New Medicare managed care organizations will be eligible for endorsement provided CMS approves their Part C application, the new Medicare managed care organizations demonstrate to CMS that they meet the criteria under paragraph (b) of this section, and the new Medicare managed care organizations demonstrate that they will meet the requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section. (b) Eligibility to receive endorsement. Except as specified in §§ 403.814, 403.816 and 403.817, an applicant will be eligible for endorsement if its application demonstrates to CMS's satisfaction that the applicant meets the requirements of § 403.806(a) and § 403.806(b)(1) and that it would operate its endorsed program in a manner consistent with the requirements of § 403.806(b)(2) and (b)(3) through § 403.806(m). An applicant that submits a complete application that meets all of the requirements of this subpart will be eligible to enter into a contract with CMS to operate a Medicare-endorsed prescription drug discount card program. Following the receipt of its Medicare endorsement, an endorsed sponsor must comply with the requirements of § 403.806(b)(2) and (b)(3) through § 403.806(m) through the end of the transition period. (c) Ability to subcontract with other organizations and entities. (1) An applicant for endorsement may demonstrate that it meets the requirements of this subpart by combining with subcontractors. (2) Any subcontracts must be in final form satisfactory to CMS, signed by all applicable parties, and filed with CMS before an endorsed sponsor will be permitted to engage in any enrollment or information and outreach. (3) Once endorsed, an endorsed sponsor must ensure that its subcontractors comply with all applicable requirements of this subpart. (d) Period of endorsement. An applicant eligible to receive endorsement will be required to sign a contract with CMS agreeing to operate its approved Medicare-endorsed prescription drug discount card program(s) until the end of the transition period. (e)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, we expect an endorsed sponsor to be ready by June 8, 2004, to initiate enrollment and fully operate its endorsed program in compliance with the requirements of § 403.806(b)(2) and (b)(3) through § 403.806(m). (2) A new Medicare managed care organization must be ready to initiate enrollment and fully operate its exclusive card program in compliance with the requirements of §§ 403.806(b)(2) and (b)(3) through § 403.806(m) upon approval of its Part C application and application for Medicare endorsement of its prescription drug discount card program. § 403.806 Sponsor requirements for eligibility for endorsement. Except as specified in §§ 403.814, 403.816, and 403.817, an endorsed sponsor must meet the following requirements: (a) Applicant experience. (1) An applicant must be a non-governmental, single legal entity doing business in the United States. (2) An applicant must have 3 years of private sector experience in the United States in pharmacy benefit management, which is defined to mean— (i) Adjudicating and processing claims for drugs at the point of sale; (ii) Negotiating with prescription drug manufacturers and others for discounts, rebates, and/or other price concessions on prescription drugs; and (iii) Administering and tracking individuals' subsidies or benefits in real time. (3) A single legal entity which is either the applicant or a subcontractor must, at the time of application for Medicare endorsement, operate a pharmacy benefit program, a prescription drug discount card program, a low-income drug assistance program, or a similar program that serves at least 1 million covered lives. (b) Financial stability and business integrity. (1) An applicant must demonstrate a satisfactory record of the financial stability and business integrity of itself, any subcontractors on whom the applicant relies to satisfy the 3 years experience requirement in paragraph (a)(2) of this section and the 1 million covered lives requirement in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, and any subcontractors engaged by the applicant to perform the following activities: develop the pharmacy network; negotiate with manufacturers or pharmacies for rebates, discounts, or other price concessions; handle eligibility for or enrollment in the endorsed sponsor's endorsed discount card program and/or transitional assistance; and administer transitional assistance. (2) An endorsed sponsor and any subcontractors described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section must maintain a satisfactory record of financial stability and business integrity during the term of the endorsed program. (3) Medicare endorsement of a discount card program shall not be construed to express or imply any opinion that an endorsed sponsor or any subcontractor of an endorsed sponsor is in compliance with or not liable under the False Claims Act, anti-kickback statute (section 1128B(b) of the Act), or other legal authorities for any improper billing, claims submission, or related conduct. (c) Compliance with applicable law. An endorsed sponsor must comply with all applicable Federal and State laws, including the Federal anti-kickback statute (section 1128B(b) of the Act). (d) Prescription drug offering. An endorsed sponsor must comply with the following discount, rebate, and formulary requirements: (1) Offer all of its discount card enrollees negotiated prices on covered discount card drugs, which may be limited to those covered discount card drugs included on the endorsed sponsor's formulary. (2) If the endorsed sponsor uses a formulary, offer a negotiated price on at least one covered discount card drug in each of the lowest level categories for each of the therapeutic groups representing the drugs most commonly needed by Medicare beneficiaries as determined by CMS. A specific covered discount card drug may not be used to fulfill this requirement for more than one category. (3) Offer a negotiated price on a generic drug in at least 55 percent of the lowest level categories in each of the therapeutic groups representing the drugs most commonly needed by Medicare beneficiaries as determined by CMS. (4) In setting negotiated prices under this section, an endorsed sponsor may vary its prices and the drugs included on the formulary by pharmacy contract and enrollee characteristics, such as transitional assistance eligibility status. (5) Synchronize changes in the list of, and negotiated prices for, covered discount card drugs included in the endorsed sponsor's formulary with formulary and negotiated prices published on a price comparison Web site, as described in paragraph (i)(4)(v) of this section. (6) Obtain rebates, discounts, or other price concessions from manufacturers on covered discount card drugs and pass a share of such concessions to enrollees through negotiated prices. (7) Guarantee that network and mail order pharmacies provide the lower of the negotiated price or usual and customary price when a covered discount card drug for a negotiated price is available at the point of sale. (8) Guarantee that a network pharmacy, at the point of sale, inform a discount card enrollee of any differential between the price of a prescribed drug (if it is a covered discount card drug) and the price of the lowest priced generic covered discount card drug that is therapeutically equivalent and bioequivalent and available at such pharmacy. Mail order pharmacies are to provide this information at the time of delivery of the drug. (9) Except during the week of November 15, 2004 (which coincides with the beginning of the annual coordinated election period), ensure that any increase in the negotiated price for a covered discount card drug does not exceed an amount proportionate to the change in the drug's average wholesale price (AWP), and/or an amount proportionate to the changes in the endorsed sponsor's cost structure, including material changes to any discounts, rebates, or other price concessions the endorsed sponsor receives from a pharmaceutical manufacturer or pharmacy. (e) Transitional assistance administration. An endorsed sponsor must administer transitional assistance funds, including any roll-over funds as described in § 403.808(f), for transitional assistance enrollees, through the following procedures: (1) Establish accounting procedures to manage the transitional assistance funds for each transitional assistance enrollee. (2) Ensure that transitional assistance funds are applicable to, and only to, all covered discount card drugs available at the endorsed sponsors' network and mail order pharmacies, regardless of formulary. (3) Ensure that, at network and mail order pharmacies, transitional assistance funds are applied at the lower of negotiated price (if any) and the pharmacy's usual and customary price. (4) Ensure that network pharmacies make available to the transitional assistance enrollee, electronically or by telephone, at the point-of-sale of covered discount card drugs, the amount of transitional assistance remaining available to the transitional assistance enrollee. Mail order pharmacies are to make this information available by telephone. (5) Maintain a toll-free telephone number that discount card enrollees may use to determine their transitional assistance balances. (6) Enforce coinsurance requirements described in § 403.808(e) and ensure that the portion of the price paid through coinsurance is not deducted from the total transitional assistance funds available to the discount card enrollee. (f) Service area and pharmacy access. An endorsed sponsor must meet the following requirements for its service area and its pharmacy network: (1) The service area must cover one or more States. (2) The endorsed sponsor's discount card program must be available to all eligible individuals residing in each State in the endorsed sponsor's service area and may not be offered to individuals residing outside of the United States. (3) The endorsed sponsor must have a contracted pharmacy network, consisting of pharmacies other than mail-order pharmacies, sufficient to ensure that for beneficiaries residing in the endorsed sponsor's service area the following requirements are satisfied: (i) At least 90 percent of Medicare beneficiaries, on average, in urban areas served by the endorsed program, live within 2 miles of a network pharmacy; (ii) At least 90 percent of Medicare beneficiaries, on average, in suburban areas served by the endorsed program, live within 5 miles of a network pharmacy; and (iii) At least 70 percent of Medicare beneficiaries, on average, in rural areas served by the endorsed program, live within 15 miles of a network pharmacy. (4) The endorsed sponsor's pharmacy network may be supplemented by pharmacies offering home delivery via mail-order, provided the requirements of paragraph (f)(3) of this section are met. (g) Information and outreach and customer service. (1) An endorsed sponsor must provide through the Internet and some other tangible medium (such as a mailing) to Medicare beneficiaries information and outreach materials describing its endorsed drug card program, including the following information— (i) The enrollment fee; (ii) Negotiated prices offered for covered discount card drugs; (iii) If offered, discounts on over-the-counter drugs; (iv) Any other products or services offered under the endorsement; and (v) Any other information that CMS determines is necessary for a full description of the endorsed discount drug card program. (2) An endorsed sponsor must include on a Web site the following: (i) Information regarding when the Web site was last updated; and (ii) A disclaimer that the information on the Web site may not be current. (3) An endorsed sponsor must use the following forms which incorporate standard elements provided by CMS: (i) An enrollment form (except as may be modified for an exclusive card sponsor as discussed in § 403.814(b)(5)(iii); and (ii) An eligibility determination notice. (4) An endorsed sponsor must provide to each enrollee a card that complies with National Council for Prescription Drug Programs standards. (5) An endorsed sponsor must meet the following requirements for the review and approval of information and outreach materials: (i) Comply with the Information and Outreach Guidelines published by CMS except as provided in paragraph (g)(5)(vi) of this section. (ii) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(5)(iii) of this section, not distribute any information and outreach materials until or unless they are approved by CMS. (iii) If CMS does not disapprove the initial submission of information and outreach materials within 30 days of receipt of these materials, the materials are deemed approved under paragraph (g)(5)(ii) of this section. (iv) Information and outreach materials may discuss only products or services inside the scope of endorsement, as described in paragraph (h) of this section. (v) Information and outreach materials include the same kinds of materials described in 42 CFR 422.80(b), as well as the enrollment form, eligibility determination form, and membership card described in paragraphs (g)(3) and (g)(4) of this section, Web site content, and information regarding discounts for over-the-counter drugs. (vi) All materials related to products and services that are Part D plans must comply with the requirements specified in § 423.50 of this chapter. (6) An endorsed sponsor must maintain a toll-free customer call center that is open during usual business hours and that provides customer telephone service, including to pharmacists, in accordance with standard business practices. The endorsed sponsor must inform enrollees that the toll-free telephone number provides information on the amount of remaining transitional assistance, in accordance with paragraph (e)(5) of this section. (7) An endorsed sponsor must provide a system to reduce the likelihood of medical errors and adverse drug interactions and to improve medication use. (h) Products and services inside and outside the scope of the endorsement. (1) An endorsed sponsor may provide, under the endorsement, only those products and services inside the scope of the endorsement, including conducting enrollment. An endorsed sponsor must ensure that discount card enrollees are not charged any additional fee (other than the enrollment fee allowed under § 403.811(c)) for products or services inside the scope of the endorsement. (2) Products and services inside the scope of the endorsement are limited to— (i) Products or services offered for no additional fee, other than the enrollment fee allowed under § 403.811(c), that are directly related to a covered discount card drug; or (ii) A discounted price for an over-the-counter drug. (i) Reporting. (1) An endorsed sponsor must report to CMS on a periodic basis information on the major features of the endorsed sponsor's programs that correspond to the qualifications for endorsement, including, but not limited to, information concerning— (i) Savings from pharmacies and manufacturers obtained through rebates, discounts, and other price concessions; (ii) Savings shared with discount card enrollees by manufacturer, by all retail pharmacies, by all mail order pharmacies, and by all brand name and all generic covered discount card drugs; (iii) Dispensing fees; (iv) Certified (by the chief financial officer) financial accounting records on transitional assistance used by the transitional assistance enrollees in each month; (v) Participant utilization and spending statements; (vi) Utilization and spending for selected drugs; (vii) Performance on customer service metrics such as call center performance; (viii) Grievance logs; and (ix) Endorsed sponsor's compliance with the pharmacy network access standards. (2) An endorsed sponsor must provide notice of, and the rationale for, negotiated price increases, except for increases during the week of November 15, 2004, due to reasons other than changes in average wholesale price (AWP). (3) An endorsed sponsor must certify that based on best knowledge, information, and belief, the reported information is accurate, complete, truthful, and supportable. (4) Through a price comparison Web site, an endorsed sponsor must report the following information: (i) Customer service hours; (ii) Customer service contact information; (iii) Endorsed program Web site address; (iv) Annual enrollment fee; and (v) Negotiated prices (including any applicable dispensing fee), for every covered discount card drug included in the discount card program's offering. (5) CMS may require endorsed sponsors to submit, in standard terminology, descriptions of other discount card related services they provide, such as pharmacist services. (j) Grievance process. An endorsed sponsor must establish and maintain a grievance process. This process must be designed to track and appropriately address in a timely manner enrollees' complaints about any aspect of their endorsed program for which the endorsed sponsor is responsible. (k) Eligibility, enrollment, and disenrollment. (1) An endorsed sponsor must make preliminary eligibility determinations in accordance with § 403.810 and conduct enrollment and disenrollment in accordance with § 403.811. (l) Authorized representative. An endorsed sponsor must treat an individual's authorized representative as the individual, if under applicable law, the authorized representative has the legal authority to act on behalf of the individual with respect to the action at issue. (m) Other. An endorsed sponsor must meet the requirements of §§ 403.812, 403.813, and 403.822 of this subpart. [68 FR 69915, Dec. 15, 2003, as amended at 70 FR 52023, Sept. 1, 2005] § 403.808 Use of transitional assistance funds. (a) Individuals determined eligible for transitional assistance in 2004. Subject to paragraph (d) of this section, an individual who, in calendar year 2004, is determined eligible for transitional assistance under § 403.810(b) is entitled to the following: (1) $600 in calendar year 2004; and (2) $600 in calendar year 2005. (b) Individuals determined eligible for transitional assistance in 2005. Subject to paragraph (d) of this section, an individual who, in calendar year 2005, is determined eligible for transitional assistance under § 403.810(b) is entitled to one of the following amounts for calendar year 2005: (1) If the complete application for the individual's transitional assistance eligibility is received on or after January 1, 2005 and before April 1, 2005, $600. (2) If the complete application for the individual's transitional assistance eligibility is received on or after April 1, 2005 and before July 1, 2005, $450. (3) If the complete application for the individual's transitional assistance eligibility is received on or after July 1, 2005 and before October 1, 2005, $300. (4) If the complete application for the individual's transitional assistance eligibility is received on or after October 1, 2005 and on or before December 31, 2005, $150. (c) Payment of enrollment fee. An individual found eligible for transitional assistance is entitled to have CMS pay the annual enrollment fee to the endorsed sponsor on his or her behalf. (d) Conditions on use of transitional assistance. A transitional assistance enrollee may access the transitional assistance described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section only if the following conditions are met: (1) Except as provided in § 403.814(b)(3)(v), the transitional assistance funds are applied toward the cost of a covered discount card drug obtained under the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program; (2) The individual pays a coinsurance amount in accordance with § 403.808(e); (3) The individual purchases the covered discount card drug on or after the individual's transitional assistance effective date; and (4) The individual is enrolled in the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program on the date the individual's claim for the covered discount card drug is adjudicated. (e) Coinsurance. If sufficient transitional assistance funds are available, transitional assistance funds must be expended in accordance with the following: (1) For beneficiaries with incomes at or below 100 percent of the poverty line, 95 percent of the price of a covered discount card drug must be paid from the available transitional assistance funds. (2) For beneficiaries with incomes greater than 100 percent but at or below 135 percent of the poverty line, 90 percent of the price of a covered discount card drug must be paid from the available transitional assistance funds. (f) Rollover. An individual with transitional assistance retains access to any balance of transitional assistance not expended in a calendar year during the next calendar year, up to and including the transition period, if the individual— (1) Remains in his or her current endorsed discount card program; (2) Elects a new endorsed program in an Annual Coordinated Election Period; or (3) Is eligible for a Special Election Period under § 403.811(b)(2) and elects a new endorsed discount card program during such Special Election Period. § 403.810 Eligibility and reconsiderations. (a) Eligibility for an endorsed discount card program. An individual is eligible to enroll in an endorsed discount card program only if such individual meets the following conditions: (1) The individual is entitled to benefits, or enrolled, under Medicare Part A or enrolled under Medicare Part B; and (2) The individual, at the time of applying to enroll in an endorsed discount card program, is not enrolled in a State medical assistance program under Title XIX of the Act or under a waiver pursuant to section 1115 of the Act, under which the individual is entitled to any medical assistance for outpatient prescribed drugs as described in section 1905(a)(12) of the Act, except as allowed in § 403.817(d). (b) Eligibility for transitional assistance. An individual is eligible to receive transitional assistance if, at the time of applying for transitional assistance, the individual meets the following conditions: (1) The individual meets the conditions in paragraph (a) of this section; (2) The individual resides in one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia; (3) The individual's income is not more than 135 percent of the poverty line applicable to the individual's family size; (4) The individual does not have coverage for covered discount card drugs under one or more of the following sources: (i) A group health plan or health insurance coverage, as these terms are defined under section 2791 of the Public Health Service Act, other than a Part C plan or a group health plan consisting solely of excepted benefits (such as a Medigap plan) as the term is defined under section 2791 of the Public Health Service Act; (ii) Coverage provided under Chapter 55 of Title 10, United States Code, including TRICARE; or (iii) A Federal Employee's Health Benefits Program plan; and (5) The individual (or the individual's authorized representative) completes a standard enrollment form and signs and dates the form in accordance with § 403.811(a)(4). By signing the form, the individual (or the individual's authorized representative) certifies, under penalty of perjury, that, to the best of the individual's knowledge, the information he or she provides on the form is accurate. (c) Special rule for QMBs, SLMBs and QIs. An individual is deemed to meet the income requirements in paragraph (b)(3) of this section if the individual is enrolled under Title XIX of the Act as a— (1) Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB); (2) Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiary (SLMB); or (3) Qualified Individual (QI). (d) Duration of eligibility determinations. An individual determined eligible for the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program and, in the case of transitional assistance enrollees, for transitional assistance, shall remain eligible for the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program and, in the case of transitional assistance enrollees, for transitional assistance for the duration of the individual's enrollment in the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program. (e) Drug card and transitional assistance benefits not treated as benefits under other Federal programs. Any benefits received under the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program must not be taken into account in determining an individual's eligibility for, or the amount of benefits under, any other Federal program. (f) Verification of eligibility. (1) CMS will verify eligibility to enroll in an endorsed discount card program or to receive transitional assistance. (2) If CMS is unable to verify an individual's eligibility or ineligibility for transitional assistance, CMS can require the individual to provide additional income information in a form and manner specified by CMS as one condition of eligibility for transitional assistance. (g) Reconsideration. (1) If an individual is determined ineligible to enroll in an endorsed discount card program under paragraph (a) of this section or determined ineligible to receive transitional assistance under paragraph (b) of this section, the individual (or the individual's authorized representative) has a right to request that an independent review entity under contract with CMS reconsider the determination. (2) Reconsideration requests must be filed within 60 days from date of notice of an ineligibility determination, unless the individual (or the individual's authorized representative) can demonstrate good cause for why the 60-day time frame should be extended. (3) An individual (or the individual's authorized representative) may submit additional documentary evidence or an explanation about his or her eligibility in writing to the independent review entity, as part of the reconsideration process. (4) Reconsideration decisions shall be issued by the independent review entity in writing and contain an explanation of the reasoning of the decision. § 403.811 Enrollment and disenrollment and associated endorsed sponsor requirements. (a) Enrollment process. (1) An individual (or an individual's authorized representative) applying to enroll in an endorsed discount card program must complete a standard enrollment form or other method allowed by CMS and provide such information to the endorsed discount card program in which the individual wishes to enroll. (2) An individual electing to join an endorsed discount card program that charges an annual enrollment fee, and who is not applying for transitional assistance, must agree to pay the annual enrollment fee, if any, in a form and manner determined by the endorsed card sponsor. (3) An individual applying for transitional assistance at the time that they apply for enrollment in an endorsed discount card program may only enroll in the endorsed discount card program at that time if CMS determines that the individual is eligible for transitional assistance. Individuals not found eligible for transitional assistance may enroll in an endorsed discount card program without applying for transitional assistance after being notified of their ineligibility for transitional assistance. (4) An individual applying for transitional assistance must complete a standard enrollment form and sign and date the form, certifying, under penalty of perjury or similar sanction for false statements, as to the accuracy of the information provided on the standard enrollment form. (5) Except as provided in § 403.811(b)(4), an individual who is not currently enrolled in an endorsed card program seeking to enroll in the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program may do so at any time during the enrollment period. (6) An individual may not be enrolled in more than one endorsed discount card program at a time. (7) An individual may enroll in only one endorsed discount card program per year during the enrollment period. An individual enrolling during the initial enrollment year, with the exception of the circumstances under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, may change election for the second enrollment year during the annual coordinated election period. During the second enrollment year, an individual may enroll in only one endorsed discount card program, unless the individual meets the circumstances described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. (8) An individual remains enrolled in an endorsed discount card program elected unless— (i) The individual is disenrolled under paragraph (b) of this section; (ii) The individual elects a new program during the Annual Coordinated Election Period; or (iii) The endorsed sponsor terminates its endorsed discount card program, or is terminated. (9) No new enrollment in an endorsed discount card program or changing election of an endorsed discount card program is allowed during the transition period. (10) Except as specified in § 403.814(b)(6)(i), an individual may enroll in any endorsed discount card program, and only those endorsed discount card programs, offered in the individual's State of residence. (11) In order to access negotiated prices or transitional assistance, if applicable, an individual must be enrolled in an endorsed discount card program. Access to negotiated prices begins with the effective date of enrollment and ends with disenrollment. Access to transitional assistance begins with the transitional assistance effective date and ends for claims finalized on the date of disenrollment. (12) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(5) of this section, an individual may apply for transitional assistance at any time during the enrollment period. (b) Disenrollment process. (1) An enrollee may voluntarily disenroll at any time by notifying (or by having his authorized representative notify) the endorsed sponsor. (2) An enrolled individual who disenrolls during the enrollment period under the following circumstances is granted a Special Election Period in which the individual may enroll in another endorsed discount card program during the enrollment period: (i) A move of residence outside the service area of the current program; (ii) A change in residence to or from a long-term care facility; (iii) Enrollment in or disenrollment from a Part C plan or Medicare cost plan; (iv) An individual's current endorsed discount card program is terminated or terminates; or (v) Other exceptional circumstances, as defined by the Secretary. (3) Notification in order to effect a disenrollment is not required for an individual disenrolling from a terminating endorsed discount card program or enrolling in or disenrolling from a Medicare managed care plan offering an exclusive card program, or for individuals changing endorsed discount card programs during the Annual Coordinated Election Period. (4) A drug discount card enrollee who disenrolls from an endorsed discount card program other than for one of the reasons listed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section will no longer be determined eligible for the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program and, if he or she disenrolls in 2004, must re-apply for the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program should he or she wish to enroll in another endorsed discount card program for the second enrollment year. (5) An individual receiving transitional assistance who voluntarily disenrolls from an endorsed discount card program other than for one of the reasons listed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section will forfeit any transitional assistance remaining available to the individual on the date of disenrollment, and, if he or she disenrolls in 2004, must re-apply for transitional assistance for 2005 in order to receive transitional assistance in 2005. (6) A discount card enrollee other than a transitional assistance enrollee may be involuntarily disenrolled from his or her endorsed discount card program for failure to pay the annual enrollment fee on a timely basis. (7) A discount drug card enrollee other than a transitional assistance enrollee may be charged another annual enrollment fee each time the individual disenrolls from one endorsed discount card program and enrolls in another endorsed discount card program during the calendar year. (c) Enrollment fees. (1) An endorsed sponsor may charge an annual enrollment fee of no more than $30 to each individual enrolled in its endorsed discount card program. (2) An endorsed sponsor may not collect an enrollment fee from any individual applying for or receiving transitional assistance. (3) The annual enrollment fee must not be prorated for portions of the year. (4) An endorsed sponsor must charge a uniform enrollment fee to every discount card eligible individual, or to the Secretary in the case of individuals receiving transitional assistance, residing in a State. (5) An endorsed sponsor must refund any enrollment fee collected from a discount card enrollee, or any State that has paid the enrollment fee on behalf of the discount card enrollee, during the calendar year during which the individual is determined eligible to receive transitional assistance. (6) An endorsed sponsor may not charge an annual enrollment fee during the transition period. § 403.812 HIPAA privacy, security, administrative data standards, and national identifiers. (a) HIPAA covered entities. An endorsed sponsor is a HIPAA covered entity and must comply with the standards, implementation specifications, and requirements in 45 CFR parts 160, 162, and 164 as set forth in this section. Those functions of an endorsed sponsor the performance of which are necessary or directly related to the operations of the endorsed discount card program are covered functions for purposes of applying to endorsed sponsors the standards, implementation specifications, and requirements in 45 CFR parts 160, 162, and 164. (b) HIPAA privacy requirements. An endorsed sponsor must comply with the standards, implementation specifications, and requirements in the Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information, 45 CFR parts 160 and 164, subparts A and E, in the same manner as a health plan, except to the extent such requirements are temporarily waived by the Secretary. (c) Security requirements —(1) Standard. An endorsed sponsor must comply with the applicable standards, implementation specifications, and requirements in the HIPAA Security Rule, 45 CFR parts 160 and 164, subparts A and C, in the same manner as other covered entities as of the compliance date of such Rule. (2) Attestation. An applicant in its application shall— (i) Attest that, as of the initial enrollment date, it will have in place appropriate administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to protect the privacy of protected health information in accordance with 45 CFR 164.530(c); and (ii) Attest that its information security measures will meet the standards, implementation specifications, and requirements of 45 CFR part 164 subparts A and C as of the initial enrollment date, or, if unable to make this attestation, provide a plan for coming into compliance with these requirements by the compliance date of the Security Rule set forth in 45 CFR part 164, subpart C. (d) Administrative data standards. An endorsed sponsor must comply with any applicable standards, implementation specifications, and requirements in the Standards for Electronic Transactions under 45 CFR parts 160 and 162 subparts I through R. (e) Unique identifiers. An endorsed sponsor must comply with any applicable standards, implementation specifications, and requirements regarding standard unique identifiers under 45 CFR parts 160 and 162 as of the compliance date of any final rule for standard unique identifiers. (f) Applicability of other regulations. Nothing in this paragraph or in § 403.813 shall be deemed a modification of parts 160, 162 and 164 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations or otherwise modify the applicability of such regulations to other organizations or covered entities independently subject to the mandates of HIPAA. If an endorsed sponsor is also a health plan, health care provider, or health care clearinghouse, nothing is this paragraph shall impair or otherwise affect the application of HIPAA or parts 160, 162 and 164 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations to such entity and its performance of those functions which make such entity a health plan, health care provider, or health care clearinghouse. § 403.813 Marketing limitations and record retention requirements. (a) Marketing limitations. (1) An endorsed sponsor may only market the following: (i) Those products and services offered under the endorsed program that are inside the scope of endorsement defined in § 403.806(h) and permitted under § 403.812(b). (ii) A Part D plan offered by the endorsed sponsor or an affiliated organization of the endorsed sponsor. (2) An endorsed sponsor may not request that a drug card enrollee or an individual seeking to enroll in its endorsed discount card program authorize the endorsed sponsor to use or disclose individually identifiable health information for purposes of marketing any product or service not allowed under paragraph (a)(1) of this section. (3) An endorsed sponsor may not co-mingle any materials related to the marketing of products and services allowed under paragraph (a)(1) of this section with other marketing materials. (4) Following termination of an endorsed sponsor's endorsement under §§ 403.820(c), (d) or (e) or termination of the Medicare Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program, a drug card enrollee's individually identifiable health information collected or maintained by an endorsed sponsor may not be used or disclosed for purposes of marketing any product or service. (b) Record retention standard. (1) An endorsed sponsor must retain records that it creates, collects, or maintains while participating in the Medicare Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program as part of its operations of an endorsed program for at least 6 years following termination of such program, or, in the event the endorsed sponsor's endorsement is terminated under § 420.820(c), (d), or (e) of this chapter at least 6 years following termination of such endorsement. The Secretary may extend the six-year retention period if an endorsed sponsor's records relate to an ongoing investigation, litigation, or negotiation by the Secretary, the Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General, the Department of Justice, or a State, or such documents otherwise relate to suspicions of fraud and abuse or violations of Federal or State law. (2) For the period during which an endorsed sponsor retains records as specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, an endorsed sponsor must continue to apply security and privacy protections to such records and the information contained therein to the same extent endorsed sponsors are required to do so under §§ 403.812(b) and 403.812(c)(1) prior to termination. [68 FR 69915, Dec. 15, 2003, as amended at 70 FR 52023, Sept. 1, 2005] § 403.814 Special rules concerning Part C organizations and Medicare cost plans and their enrollees. (a) General requirements. (1) A Part C organization and Medicare cost plan may not require enrollment in an endorsed discount card program as a condition for enrollment in its Part C plan or Medicare cost plan. (2) A Part C organization may subsidize the enrollment fee for an endorsed discount card program, whether operated by the Part C organization or another endorsed sponsor, for individuals described in § 403.810(a), provided that any such benefit is reflected in the Part C organization's Adjusted Community Rate filing. (b) Exclusive card sponsors. (1) A Medicare managed care organization may elect to become an exclusive card sponsor by limiting enrollment in its endorsed discount card program to individuals described in § 403.810(a) who are enrolled in any of its Medicare managed care plans. The Medicare managed care organization must be the applicant for endorsement in order to offer an exclusive card program. Such an election must be made at the time of application for endorsement. (2) Except as noted in paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section, an exclusive card sponsor must comply with all requirements for endorsed sponsors noted in §§ 403.804 and 403.806. (3) An exclusive card sponsor is deemed to meet or is exempt from certain specific requirements listed in § 403.806 as follows: (i) An exclusive card sponsor is deemed to meet the pharmacy network requirement in § 403.806(f)(3) if its pharmacy network is not limited to mail-order pharmacies and is equivalent to the pharmacy network used in its Medicare managed care plan and such pharmacy network has been approved by the Secretary, or, if its Medicare managed care plan does not use a pharmacy network, the Secretary determines that the pharmacy network provides sufficient access to covered discount card drugs at negotiated prices for discount card enrollees under the standard set forth under 42 CFR 422.112 for a Part C organization described in section 1851(a)(2)(A) of the Act, or under 42 CFR 417.416(e) for a Medicare cost plan. (ii) An exclusive card sponsor is deemed to meet the service area requirements in § 403.806(f)(1) and (f)(2) if it operates in a service area equivalent to its Medicare managed care plan's service area. (iii) An exclusive card sponsor is deemed to meet the requirement for financial stability and business integrity in § 403.806(b) through compliance with § 422.400 of this chapter (if a Part C organization described in section 1851(a)(2)(A) of the Act) or compliance with §§ 417.120 and 417.122 of this chapter (if a Medicare cost plan). (iv) An exclusive card sponsor is deemed to meet the covered lives requirement in § 403.806(a)(3). (v) An exclusive card sponsor is deemed to meet the requirements of § 403.806(e)(2) if it ensures that transitional assistance funds are applied to, and only to, the cost to transitional assistance enrollees of any covered discount card drugs obtained from a network or mail order pharmacy included in the exclusive card sponsor's pharmacy network, and at the option of the exclusive card sponsor, any covered discount card drug obtained under an outpatient prescription drug benefit offered under the affiliated Medicare managed care plan, including any deductibles, co-payments, coinsurance, and other cost-sharing amounts for which transitional assistance enrollees are responsible under the Medicare managed care plan's outpatient prescription drug benefit. (4) As the Secretary determines appropriate on a case-by-case basis, any additional requirements discussed in §§ 403.804 and 403.806, except for the requirements in §§ 403.812 and 403.813, may be waived or modified on behalf of an exclusive card sponsor if: (i) The requirements are duplicative of or conflict with the requirements that a Medicare managed care organization must meet either under Part C or under section 1876 of Title XVIII of the Act; or (ii) The waiver or modification is necessary to improve coordination between benefits under the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program and the benefits either under Part C or under section 1876 of Title XVIII of the Act. (iii) The applicant seeking to become an exclusive card sponsor requests such waivers or modifications in writing in a manner required by the Secretary. (5) An exclusive card sponsor may conduct group enrollment according to the following rules: (i) The exclusive card sponsor must seek CMS verification that its Medicare managed care members are individuals described in § 403.810(a) and enroll such individuals as a group into its exclusive card program. (ii) The exclusive card sponsor must give all individuals it is enrolling as a group the opportunity to decline enrollment, and the opportunity to apply for transitional assistance. (iii) The exclusive card sponsor may use a modified version of the standard enrollment form described in § 403.806(g)(3) or other CMS-approved process for group enrollment in its endorsed discount card program. (6) An individual enrolled in a Medicare managed care plan offered by a Medicare managed care organization offering an exclusive card program to individuals enrolled in such Medicare managed care plan is subject to the following requirements: (i) The individual may enroll only in the endorsed discount card program offered by his or her Medicare managed care organization. (ii) If the exclusive card sponsor group elects to group enroll into an exclusive card program members of the Medicare managed plan, the individual must actively decline enrollment to avoid enrollment in the exclusive card program. (c) Non-uniformity of Benefits. Implementation of the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program, including the provision of transitional assistance and the payment or waiver of any enrollment fee by a Part C organization, will not be taken into account in applying the uniform premium and uniform benefits requirement in sections 1854(c) and 1854(f)(1)(D) of the Act and 42 CFR 422.100(d)(2) and 42 CFR 422.312(b)(2). § 403.815 Special rules concerning States. (a) Optional State payment of enrollment fee. (1) A State may enter into payment arrangements with endorsed sponsors to provide payment of some or all of endorsed discount card programs' enrollment fees for some or all of the State's individuals described in § 403.810(a) who are not transitional assistance enrollees, provided the enrollment fees are paid directly by the State to the endorsed sponsor. (2) Expenditures made by a State for enrollment fees described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must not be treated as State expenditures for which Federal matching payments are available under titles XIX or XXI of the Act. (b) Optional State payment of coinsurance. (1) A State may enter into payment arrangements with pharmacies to provide payment of some or all of coinsurance amounts described in § 403.808(e) for some or all of the State's transitional assistance enrollees, provided the coinsurance amounts are paid directly by the State to the pharmacy. (2) Expenditures made by a State for coinsurance described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section must not be treated as State expenditures for which Federal matching payments are available under titles XIX or XXI of the Act. (c) Coinsurance for Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries. For transitional assistance enrollees who are qualified Medicare beneficiaries, any coinsurance liability under § 403.808(e) must not be treated as Medicare cost-sharing coinsurance, under section 1905(p)(3)(B) of the Act, for which a State would otherwise be required to pay. (d) State data. (1) A State must provide data on a monthly basis in an electronic format as determined necessary by the Secretary to effectuate the verification of beneficiary eligibility for the Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card and Transitional Assistance Program. (2) Expenditures made by a State in complying with the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of this section will be treated as State expenditures for which Federal matching payments are available under section 1903(a)(7) of the Act. § 403.816 Special rules concerning long-term care and I/T/U pharmacies. (a) In general. (1) An applicant for endorsement may submit an application to become a special endorsed sponsor for long-term care and/or for I/T/U pharmacies. (2) Of qualified applicants, the Secretary will select at least two of the best-qualified applicants for special endorsement for long-term care and at least two of the best-qualified applicants for special endorsement for I/T/U pharmacies. (3) Applicants for special endorsement for long-term care must demonstrate in their applications that they meet the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section. (4) Applicants for special endorsement for I/T/U pharmacies must demonstrate in their applications that they meet the requirements in paragraph (d) of this section. (b) Long-term care. A special endorsed sponsor for long-term care must— (1) Apply transitional assistance toward the cost of covered discount card drugs obtained by transitional assistance enrollees who reside in long-term care facilities and who receive such prescription drugs through long-term care pharmacies; (2) Offer contractual arrangements to any long-term care pharmacy seeking reimbursement from transitional assistance for covered discount card drugs provided by such pharmacy to transitional assistance enrollees who reside in long-term care facilities; (3) Process any submitted claims from network pharmacies and out-of-network long-term care pharmacies that supply covered discount card drugs to transitional assistance enrollees who reside in long-term care facilities, when such enrollees have unspent transitional assistance remaining; (4) Include special terms and conditions in its contracts with network pharmacies that are long-term care pharmacies to facilitate access to and the administration of transitional assistance to transitional assistance enrollees residing in long-term care facilities, including, but not limited to the following— (i) Waiving penalties against long-term care pharmacies for submitting late claims to the special endorsed sponsor due to the pharmacy's coordination of benefits activities; and (ii) Permitting a long-term care pharmacy to limit its services to only transitional assistance enrollees who reside in a long-term care facility served by the long-term care pharmacy. (5) Except as noted in paragraph (c) of this section, comply with all requirements for endorsed sponsors noted in §§ 403.804 and 403.806. (c) Waiver of requirements. (1) The following requirements will not apply to or will be waived for special endorsed sponsors providing transitional assistance to long-term care residents: (i) Section 403.806(d) (relating to the prescription drug offering) shall not apply to long-term care pharmacies in the special endorsed sponsor's network; and (ii) Section 403.806(e)(4) (requiring information about the amount of transitional assistance remaining) shall not apply to long-term care pharmacies in the special endorsed sponsor's network. (2)(i) As the Secretary determines appropriate on a case-by-case basis, any additional requirements discussed in §§ 403.804 and 403.806, except for the requirements in §§ 403.812 and 403.813, may be waived or modified on behalf of a special endorsed sponsor for long-term care if the waiver or modification is— (A) Necessary to enable the applicant to either initiate enrollment activities under the special endorsement within 6 months of enactment of section 1860D-31 of the Act, or accommodate the unique needs of long-term care pharmacies; or (B) Compliance with the requirement(s) in question would be impracticable or inefficient. (ii) Applicants to become special endorsed sponsors for long-term care must request such waivers or modifications in writing in a manner required by the Secretary. (d) I/T/U pharmacies. A special endorsed sponsor for I/T/U pharmacies must— (1) Apply transitional assistance toward the cost of covered discount card drugs obtained by transitional assistance enrollees who are American Indians and Alaska Natives and who receive prescription drugs through I/T/U pharmacies as allowed under paragraph (d)(2) of this section; (2) Offer contractual arrangements to any I/T/U pharmacy that is in the special endorsed sponsor's service area and seeking reimbursement from transitional assistance for covered discount card drugs provided by such pharmacy to transitional assistance enrollees who are also American Indians/Alaska Natives; (3) Include special terms and conditions in its contracts with network I/T/U pharmacies to facilitate access to and the administration of transitional assistance for transitional assistance enrollees who are American Indians/Alaska Natives, including, but not limited to the following: (i) Permitting an I/T/U pharmacy to limit its services to only those transitional assistance enrollees who are American Indians/Alaska Natives, and (ii) Allowing an I/T/U pharmacy to select which drugs to stock, which may be a more limited set than other retail pharmacies. (4) Except as noted in paragraph (e) of this section, comply with all requirements for endorsed sponsors noted in §§ 403.804 and 403.806. (e) Waiver of requirements. (1) The following requirements will not apply to or will be waived for special endorsed sponsors providing transitional assistance through I/T/U pharmacies: (i) Section 403.806(d) (relating to the prescription drug offering) shall not apply to I/T/U pharmacies in the special endorsed sponsor's network; and (ii) Section 403.806(e)(4) (requiring information about the amount of transitional assistance remaining) shall not apply to I/T/U pharmacies in the special endorsed sponsor's network. (2)(i) As the Secretary determines appropriate on a case-by-case basis, any additional requirements discussed in §§ 403.804 and 403.806, except for the requirements in §§ 403.812 and 403.813, may be waived or modified on behalf of a special endorsed sponsor for I/T/U pharmacies if the waiver or modification is— (A) Necessary to enable the applicant to either initiate enrollment activities under the special endorsement within 6 months of enactment of section 1860D-31 of the Act, or accommodate the unique needs of I/T/U pharmacies; or (B) Compliance with the requirement(s) in question would be impracticable or inefficient. (ii) Applicants to become special endorsed sponsors for I/T/U pharmacies must request such waivers or modifications in writing in a manner required by the Secretary. § 403.817 Special rules concerning the territories. (a) In general. (1) An applicant for endorsement may submit an application to become a special endorsed sponsor for all of the territories. (2) Of qualified applicants, the Secretary will select at least one of the best-qualified applicants to receive a special endorsement for the territories. (3) Applicants for special endorsement for the territories must demonstrate in their applications that they meet the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section. (b) Requirements —(1) Negotiated prices. A special endorsed sponsor for residents of the territories must provide access to negotiated prices in the territories. (2) Transitional assistance. Any transitional assistance in the territories must be in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section. (3) Requirements, exception. Except as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, a special endorsed sponsor for the territories must meet the requirements of §§ 403.804 and 403.806. (c) Waiver of requirements and alternative requirements. (1) Section 403.806(d)(8) (requiring information about price differentials) shall not apply to pharmacies located in the territories and which are in the special endorsed sponsor's pharmacy network. (2) Sections 403.806(f)(2) and (f)(3) will be deemed met if the special endorsed sponsor makes a good faith effort to secure the participation of retail and mail order pharmacies throughout a territory. (3)(i) As the Secretary determines appropriate on a case-by-case basis, any additional requirements discussed in §§ 403.804 and 403.806, except for the requirements in §§ 403.812 and 403.813, may be waived or modified on behalf of a special endorsed sponsor for the territories if— (A) Such waiver is necessary to enable the applicant to either initiate enrollment activities under the special endorsement within 6 months of enactment of section 1860D-31 of the Act, or accommodate the unique needs of pharmacies in the territories; or (B) Compliance with the requirement(s) in question would be impracticable or inefficient. (ii) Applicants to become special endorsed sponsors for the territories must request such waivers or modifications in writing in a manner required by the Secretary. (d) Other exceptions. A special endorsed sponsor for the territories may enroll in its endorsed discount card program Medicaid enrollees with coverage for outpatient prescription drugs, as described in § 403.810(a)(2). (e) Transitional assistance provided by Territories. (1) Transitional assistance in the territories may be administered only according to a plan submitted by a territory and approved by CMS. (2) Territories choosing to provide transitional assistance must submit a plan to CMS within 90 days of the publication of this regulation. The plan must— (i) Describe how funds allocated to the territory are to be used to cover the cost of covered discount card drugs obtained by individuals who reside in the territory, who are entitled to benefits under Medicare Part A or enrolled under Medicare Part B, and who have income at or below 135 percent of the poverty line for the contiguous United States; and (ii) Describe how the territory will ensure that amounts received under the allotment are to be used only to provide covered discount card drugs to those individuals determined eligible for transitional assistance, as described in paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section, and (iii) Provide such written assurance for the requirements in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section. (3) CMS will review and approve plans submitted and make allotments to territories with approved plans. (4) CMS may request reports or information to substantiate that the territories have administered the program consistent with the territory's approved transitional assistance plan. § 403.820 Sanctions, penalties, and termination. (a) Intermediate sanctions. (1) For the violations listed in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the following intermediate sanctions may be imposed on any endorsed sponsor: (i) Suspension of enrollment of Medicare beneficiaries. (ii) Suspension of information and outreach activities to Medicare beneficiaries. (2) Duration of sanctions. The intermediate sanctions continue in effect until CMS is satisfied that the deficiency on which the determination was based has been corrected and is not likely to recur. (3) Sanctionable violations. The violations for which intermediate sanctions may be imposed are as follows: (i) Substantial failure to maintain a contracted retail pharmacy network meeting the requirements of § 403.806(f); (ii) Substantial failure to comply with CMS Information and Outreach Guidelines; (iii) Substantial failure to provide discount card enrollees with negotiated prices consistent with information reported to CMS for the price comparison Web site and/or reported by the endorsed sponsor; (iv) Except during the week of November 15, 2004 (which coincides with the beginning of the annual coordinated election period), substantial failure to ensure that the negotiated price for a covered discount card drug does not exceed an amount proportionate to the change in the drug's average wholesale price (AWP), and/or an amount proportionate to changes in the card sponsor's cost structure (including material changes to any discounts, rebates, or other price concessions the sponsor receives from a pharmaceutical manufacturer or pharmacy); (v) Charging drug card enrollees additional fees beyond a $30 enrollment fee; (vi) Charging transitional assistance enrollees any enrollment fee; (vii) Charging a coinsurance more than 5 percent for those at or below 100 percent of the poverty line, or 10 percent for those above 100 percent but at or below 135 percent of the poverty line; (viii) Substantial failure to administer properly the transitional assistance funding for transitional assistance enrollees; (ix) Substantial failure to provide CMS or its designees with requested information related to the endorsed sponsor's endorsed discount card operations; or (x) Failure to otherwise substantially comply with the requirements of this subpart, including failing to perform the operational requirements of this program or the failure to submit an acceptable plan of correction within the timeframe specified by CMS. (4) Written notice of proposed sanctions. (i) Prior to imposing sanctions, CMS will send a written notice to the endorsed sponsor stating the nature and basis of the proposed sanction. (ii) CMS will send a copy of the notice in paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this section to the Office of the Inspector General. (iii) CMS will allow the endorsed sponsor 15 days from the receipt of notice to provide evidence that it has not committed an act or omission that may fairly be characterized as a basis for sanction. (iv) Should an endorsed sponsor present evidence described in paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section and by the time limit described in that paragraph, a CMS official not involved in the original sanction determination shall review the evidence and provide the endorsed sponsor a concise written decision setting forth the factual and legal basis for the decision that affirms or rescinds the original determination. (5) Effective date of sanction. (i) A sanction is effective 15 days after the date that the endorsed sponsor is notified of the sanction or, if the endorsed sponsor timely seeks reconsideration of that sanction decision, on the date specified in the notice of CMS's reconsideration determination. (ii) The sanction remains in effect until CMS notifies the endorsed sponsor that CMS is satisfied that the basis for imposing the sanction has been corrected and is not likely to recur. (b) Civil monetary penalties —(1) OIG penalties. The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) may impose civil monetary penalties in accordance with 42 CFR parts 1003 and 1005 in addition to, or in place of, sanctions that CMS may impose, as described in paragraph (a) of this section, against an endorsed sponsor whom it determines has knowingly— (i) Misrepresented or falsified information in information and outreach or comparable material provided to program enrollee or other persons; (ii) Charged a program enrollee in violation of the terms of the endorsement contract; or (iii) Used transitional assistance funds in any manner that is inconsistent with the purpose of the transitional assistance program. (2) CMS penalties. If CMS determines that an endorsed sponsor has engaged in conduct that it knows or should know constitutes a violation as described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, where the failure to perform involves the operational requirements of the program, CMS may impose civil monetary penalties in accordance with 42 CFR parts 1003 and 1005 in addition to, or in place of, the sanctions that CMS may impose, as described in paragraph (a) of this section. (3) CMS or the OIG may impose civil monetary penalties of no more than $10,000 for each violation. (c) Termination of endorsement by CMS. (1) CMS may terminate the endorsement contract at any time with notice on the following bases: (i) Any of the bases for the imposition of intermediate sanctions as stated in paragraph (a)(3) of this section; or (ii) The endorsed sponsor engaged in false or misleading information and outreach practices; or (iii) The endorsed sponsor fails to comply with the requirement of § 403.804(e). (2) CMS shall provide the endorsed sponsor written notice of termination 30 days prior to the CMS-determined effective date of the termination at which time the endorsed sponsor must do the following: (i) Provide its discount card enrollees notice of the termination within 10 days of receiving notice from CMS; (ii) Continue to provide services to its discount card enrollees for 90 days after the discount card enrollees were sent the notice of termination from the endorsed sponsor; and (iii) Suspend all information and outreach and enrollment activities once enrollees have received the notice of termination. (3) Corrective action plan. Before terminating a contract, CMS shall provide the endorsed sponsor with reasonable opportunity to develop and receive CMS approval of a corrective action plan to correct the deficiencies that are the basis of the proposed termination. (d) Termination by endorsed sponsor —(1) Cause for termination. The endorsed sponsor may terminate its endorsement contract if CMS fails substantially to carry out the terms of the contract. (2) Card sponsor notice. The endorsed sponsor must give advance notice as follows: (i) To CMS, at least 90 days prior to the intended date of termination. This notice must specify the reasons why the endorsed sponsor is requesting contract termination; and (ii) To its discount card enrollees, by mail, at least 60 days prior to the termination effective date. This notice must include a written description of alternative endorsed discount card programs that serve the discount card enrollee's address. (3) Effective date of termination. The effective date of the termination is determined by CMS and is at least 90 days after the date CMS receives the endorsed sponsor's notice of intent to terminate. (e) Termination by mutual consent. (1) A contract may be modified or terminated at any time by written mutual consent. (2) If the contract is terminated by mutual consent, the endorsed sponsor must provide notice to its discount card enrollees as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section. (3) If the contract is modified by mutual consent, the endorsed sponsor must provide notice to its discount card enrollees of any changes that CMS determines are appropriate for notification within timeframes specified by CMS. (f) Appeal of contract determinations —(1) Scope. This section establishes the procedures for reviewing the following contract determinations: (i) A determination that an applicant is not qualified to enter into a contract with CMS under section 1860D-31 of the Act; and (i) A determination to terminate a contract with an endorsed sponsor in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section. (2) Notice of determination. When CMS makes an initial contract determination, it gives the endorsed sponsor or applicant written notice specifying— (i) The reasons for the determination; and (ii) The endorsed sponsor's or applicant's right to request reconsideration. (3) Effect of contract determination. The contract determination is final and binding unless a timely request for a reconsideration hearing is filed under this section. (4) Right to reconsideration. An endorsed sponsor whose contract is terminated or an applicant denied endorsement may request a hearing for reconsideration of the CMS contract determination. (5) Method and place for filing a request. A request for a reconsideration hearing must be made in writing and filed with the CMS Central Office. (6) Time for filing a request. The request for a reconsideration hearing must be filed within 15 days from the date of the notice of the initial determination. (7) Appointment of hearing officer. CMS shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct the reconsideration. The hearing officer shall be a representative of the Administrator and not otherwise a party to the contract determination. (8) Conduct of hearing. The endorsed sponsor or applicant may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and examine witnesses. A complete recording of the proceedings will be made and transcribed. (9) Reconsideration determination. A reconsideration determination is a new determination that— (i) Is based on a review of the contract determination, the evidence and findings upon which it was based, and any other written evidence submitted before notice of the reconsidered determination is mailed, including facts relating to the status of the endorsed sponsor subsequent to the contract determination; and (ii) Affirms, reverses, or modifies the initial contract determination. (10) Notice of reconsidered determination. As soon as practicable after the close of the hearing, the hearing officer issues a written reconsideration determination that contains the following: (i) Findings with respect to the applicant's qualifications to enter into or an endorsed sponsor's qualifications to remain under a contract with CMS under section 1860D-31 of the Act; (ii) A statement of the specific reasons for the reconsidered determination. (11) Effect of reconsidered determination. A reconsidered determination is final and binding on the parties and is not subject to judicial review. (g) Compliance with HIPAA. Failure of an endorsed sponsor to comply with HIPAA and/or the standards, implementation specifications, and requirements in 45 CFR parts 160, 162, and 164, as established in § 403.812, shall be a violation of HIPAA and may be enforced under sections 1176 and 1177 of the Act. § 403.822 Reimbursement of transitional assistance and associated sponsor requirements. (a) A Transitional Assistance Account is created within the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund and kept separate from all other funds within that fund. (b) The Managing Trustee of the Transitional Assistance Account shall pay on a monthly basis from the Account the amounts certified by CMS as necessary to make payments for transitional assistance as allowed in § 403.808. (c) Endorsed sponsors must routinely account to CMS for the transitional assistance provided to the transitional assistance enrollees for finalized (not pending, or denied) claims up to the allowed balance provided by CMS to the sponsor. (d) Payment transactions will be audited by the Secretary or his agent. (e) Federal funding in excess of the amount of the balance included in CMS's system is not permitted. Subpart I—Transparency Reports and Reporting of Physician Ownership or Investment Interests Source: 78 FR 9521, Feb. 8, 2013, unless otherwise noted. § 403.900 Purpose and scope. The regulations in this subpart implement section 1128G of the Act. These regulations apply to applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations and describe the requirements and procedures for applicable manufacturers to report payments or other transfers of value provided to covered recipients, as well as for applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations to report ownership or investment interests held by physicians or immediate family members of physicians in such entities. § 403.902 Definitions. For purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply: Applicable group purchasing organization means an entity that: (1) Operates in the United States; and (2) Purchases, arranges for or negotiates the purchase of a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply for a group of individuals or entities, but not solely for use by the entity itself. Applicable manufacturer means an entity that is operating in the United States and that falls within one of the following categories: (1) An entity that is engaged in the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, or conversion of a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply, but not if such covered drug, device, biological or medical supply is solely for use by or within the entity itself or by the entity's own patients. This definition does not include distributors or wholesalers (including, but not limited to, repackagers, relabelers, and kit assemblers) that do not hold title to any covered drug, device, biological or medical supply. (2) An entity under common ownership with an entity in paragraph (1) of this definition, which provides assistance or support to such entity with respect to the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion, marketing, promotion, sale, or distribution of a covered drug, device, biological or medical supply. Assistance and support means providing a service or services that are necessary or integral to the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion, marketing, promotion, sale, or distribution of a covered drug, device, biological or medical supply. Certified nurse midwife means a registered nurse who has successfully completed a program of study and clinical experience meeting guidelines prescribed by the Secretary, or has been certified by an organization recognized by the Secretary. Certified registered nurse anesthetist means a certified registered nurse anesthetist licensed by the State who meets such education, training, and other requirements relating to anesthesia services and related care as the Secretary may prescribe. In prescribing such requirements the Secretary may use the same requirements as those established by a national organization for the certification of nurse anesthetists. Such term also includes, as prescribed by the Secretary, an anesthesiologist assistant. Charitable contribution includes, but is not limited to, any payment or transfer of value made to an organization with tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, which is not provided in exchange for any goods, items or services. Charity care means services provided by a covered recipient specifically for a patient who is unable to pay for such services or for whom payment would be a significant hardship, where the covered recipient neither receives, nor expects to receive, payment because of the patient's inability to pay. Clinical investigation means any experiment involving one or more human subjects, or materials derived from human subjects, in which a drug, device, biological or medical supply is administered, dispensed or used. Clinical nurse specialist means, an individual who— (1) Is a registered nurse and is licensed to practice nursing in the State in which the clinical nurse specialist services are performed; and (2) Holds a master's degree in a defined clinical area of nursing from an accredited educational institution. Common ownership refers to circumstances where the same individual, individuals, entity, or entities directly or indirectly own 5 percent or more total ownership of two entities. This includes, but is not limited to, parent corporations, direct and indirect subsidiaries, and brother or sister corporations. Covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply means any drug, device, biological, or medical supply for which payment is available under Title XVIII of the Act or under a State plan under Title XIX or XXI of the Act (or a waiver of such plan), either separately (such as through a fee schedule or formulary) or as part of a bundled payment (for example, under the hospital inpatient prospective payment system or the hospital outpatient prospective payment system) and which is of the type that in the case of a— (1) Drug or biological, by law, requires a prescription to be dispensed; or (2) Device (including a medical supply that is a device), by law, requires premarket approval by or premarket notification to the FDA. Covered recipient means— (1) Any physician, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, certified registered nurse anesthetist, or certified nurse-midwife who is not a bona fide employee of the applicable manufacturer that is reporting the payment; or (2) A teaching hospital, which is any institution that received a payment under 1886(d)(5)(B), 1886(h), or 1886(s) of the Act during the last calendar year for which such information is available. Device identifier is the mandatory, fixed portion of a unique device identifier (UDI) that identifies the specific version or model of a device and the labeler of that device (as described at 21 CFR 801.3 in paragraph (1) of the definition of “Unique device identifier”). Employee means an individual who is considered to be “employed by” or an “employee” of an entity if the individual would be considered to be an employee of the entity under the usual common law rules applicable in determining the employer-employee relationship (as applied for purposes of section 3121(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986). Immediate family member means any of the following: (1) Spouse. (2) Natural or adoptive parent, child, or sibling. (3) Stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother, or stepsister. (4) Father-, mother-, daughter-, son-, brother-, or sister-in-law. (5) Grandparent or grandchild. (6) Spouse of a grandparent or grandchild. Indirect payments or other transfers of value refer to payments or other transfers of value made by an applicable manufacturer (or an applicable group purchasing organization) to a covered recipient (or a physician owner or investor) through a third party, where the applicable manufacturer (or applicable group purchasing organization) requires, instructs, directs, or otherwise causes the third party to provide the payment or transfer of value, in whole or in part, to a covered recipient(s) (or a physician owner or investor). Know, knowing, or knowingly —(1) Means that a person, with respect to information— (i) Has actual knowledge of the information; (ii) Acts in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the information; or (iii) Acts in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of the information; and (2) Requires no proof of a specific intent to defraud. Long term medical supply or device loan means the loan of supplies or a device for 91 days or longer. Non-teaching hospital covered recipient means a person who is one or more of the following: Physician; physician assistant; nurse practitioner; clinical nurse specialist; certified registered nurse anesthetist; or certified nurse-midwife. NPPES stands for the National Plan & Provider Enumeration System. Nurse practitioner means a nurse practitioner who performs such services as such individual is legally authorized to perform (in the State in which the individual performs such services) in accordance with State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law), and who meets such training, education, and experience requirements (or any combination thereof) as the Secretary may prescribe in regulations. Operating in the United States means that an entity— (1) Has a physical location within the United States or in a territory, possession, or commonwealth of the United States; or (2) Otherwise conducts activities within the United States or in a territory, possession, or commonwealth of the United States, either directly or through a legally-authorized agent. Ownership or investment interest —(1) Includes, but is not limited to the following: (i) Stock, stock option(s) (other than those received as compensation, until they are exercised). (ii) Partnership share(s); (iii) Limited liability company membership(s). (iv) Loans, bonds, or other financial instruments that are secured with an entity's property or revenue or a portion of that property or revenue. (2) May be direct or indirect and through debt, equity or other means. (3) Exceptions. The following are not ownership or investment interests for the purposes of this section: (i) An ownership or investment interest in a publicly traded security or mutual fund, as described in section 1877(c) of the Act. (ii) An interest in an applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that arises from a retirement plan offered by the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization to the physician (or a member of his or her immediate family) through the physician's (or immediate family member's) employment with that applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization. (iii) Stock options and convertible securities received as compensation, until the stock options are exercised or the convertible securities are converted to equity. (iv) An unsecured loan subordinated to a credit facility. (v) An ownership or investment interest if an applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization did not know, as defined in this section, about such ownership or investment interest. (vi) A titular ownership or investment interest that excludes the ability or right to receive the financial benefits of ownership or investment, including, but not limited to, the distribution of profits, dividends, proceeds of sale, or similar returns on investment; or (vii) An interest in an entity that arises from an employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) that is qualified under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Payment or other transfer of value means a transfer of anything of value. Physician has the same meaning given that term in section 1861(r) of the Act. Physician assistant means a physician assistant who performs such services as such individual is legally authorized to perform (in the State in which the individual performs such services) in accordance with State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law), and who meets such training, education, and experience requirements (or any combination thereof) as the Secretary may prescribe in regulations. Physician-owned distributorship , for the purposes of determining the existence of a reportable ownership or investment interest under this subpart, means an entity that: (1) Meets the definition of an applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization as defined in this section, and (2) Meets at least one of the following two conditions: (i) Has a minimum of 5 percent direct or indirect ownership or investment interest in the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization held by a physician or a physician's immediate family member, or (ii) A physician or a physician's immediate family member receives compensation from the applicable manufacturer or group purchasing organization in the form of a commission, return on investment, profit sharing, profit distribution, or other remuneration directly or indirectly derived from the sale or distribution of devices by the applicable manufacturer or group purchasing organization in which the physician or physician's immediate family member has ownership. (3) This physician owned distributor definition does not apply for purposes of any other laws or regulations, including, but not limited to, section 1877 of the Act, the regulations at 42 CFR part 411, subpart J, section 1128B of the Act, or the regulations at 42 CFR 1001.952. Related to a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply means that a payment or other transfer of value is made in reference to or in connection with one or more covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies. Research includes a systematic investigation designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge relating broadly to public health, including behavioral and social-sciences research. This term encompasses basic and applied research and product development. Short term medical supply or device loan means the loan of a covered device or a device under development, or the provision of a limited quantity of medical supplies for a short-term trial period, not to exceed a loan period of 90 cumulative days per calendar year or a quantity of 90 cumulative days of average daily use per calendar year, to permit evaluation of the device or medical supply by the covered recipient. Third party means another individual or entity, regardless of whether such individual or entity is operating in the United States. Unique device identifier means an identifier that adequately identifies a device through its distribution and use by meeting the requirements of 21 CFR 801.40 and 830.3. [78 FR 9521, Feb. 8, 2013, as amended at 79 FR 68000, Nov. 13, 2014; 84 FR 63185, Nov. 15, 2019; 85 FR 10, Jan 2, 2020; 86 FR 65659, Nov. 19, 2021] § 403.904 Reports of payments or other transfers of value to covered recipients. (a) General rule. (1) Direct and indirect payments or other transfers of value provided by an applicable manufacturer to a covered recipient during the preceding calendar year, and direct and indirect payments or other transfers of value provided to a third party at the request of or designated by the applicable manufacturer on behalf of a covered recipient during the preceding calendar year, must be reported by the applicable manufacturer to CMS on an annual basis. (2) For CY 2013, only payments or other transfers of value made on or after August 1, 2013 must be reported to CMS. (3) An applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that has reported payments or transfers of value under the scope of this section may not remove, delete, or alter any record/(s) unless an error is discovered in the information that had been furnished, or the record is otherwise believed to meet exceptions for reporting. (b) Limitations. Certain limitations on reporting apply in the following circumstances: (1) Applicable manufacturers for whom total (gross) revenues from covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies constituted less than 10 percent of total (gross) revenue during the fiscal year preceding the reporting year are only required to report payments or other transfers of value that are related to one or more covered drugs, devices, biologicals or medical supplies. (2) Applicable manufacturers under paragraph (2) of the definition in § 403.902 are only required to report payments or other transfers of value that are related to a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply for which they provided assistance or support to an applicable manufacturer under paragraph (1) of the definition. (3) Applicable manufacturers under either paragraph (1) or (2) of the definition in § 403.902 that have separate operating divisions that do not manufacture any covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies (for example, animal health divisions) are only required to report payments to covered recipients related to the activities of these separate divisions if those payments or other transfers of value are related to a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply. This includes reporting of payments or other transfers of value that are related to covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies made by applicable manufacturers to covered recipients through these operating divisions. (4) Applicable manufacturers that do not manufacture a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply except when under a written agreement to manufacture the covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply for another entity, do not hold the FDA approval, licensure, or clearance for the covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply, and are not involved in the sale, marketing, or distribution of the product, are only required to report payments or other transfers of value that are related to one or more covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies. (c) Required information to report. A report must contain all of the following information for each payment or other transfer of value: (1) Name of the covered recipient. For non-teaching hospital covered recipients, the name must be as listed in the National Plan & Provider Enumeration System (NPPES) (if applicable) and include first and last name, middle initial, and suffix (for all that apply). (2) Address of the covered recipient. Primary business address of the covered recipient, including all the following: (i) Street address. (ii) Suite or office number (if applicable). (iii) City. (iv) State. (v) ZIP code. (3 ) Identifiers for non-teaching hospital covered recipients. In the case of a covered recipient the following identifiers: (i) The specialty. (ii) National Provider Identifier (if applicable and as listed in the NPPES). If a National Provider Identifier cannot be identified for a non-teaching hospital covered recipient, the field may be left blank, indicating that the applicable manufacturer could not find one. (iii) State professional license number(s) (for at least one State where the non-teaching hospital covered recipient maintains a license), and the State(s) in which the license is held. (4) Amount of payment or other transfer of value. A payment or other transfer of value made to a group of covered recipients should be distributed appropriately among the individual covered recipients who requested the payment, on whose behalf the payment was made, or who are intended to benefit from the payment or other transfer of value. (5) Date of payment or transfer of value. The date of each payment or other transfer of value. (i) For payments or other transfers of value made over multiple dates (rather than as a lump sum), applicable manufacturers may choose whether to report each payment or other transfer of value as separate line item using the dates the payments or other transfers of value were each made, or as a single line item for the total payment or other transfer of value using the first payment date as the reported date. (ii) For small payments or other transfers of value reported as a single line item, applicable manufacturers must report the date that the first bundled small payment or other transfer of value was provided to the covered recipient. (6) Form of payment or transfer of value. The form of each payment or other transfer of value, as described in paragraph (d) of this section. (7) Nature of payment or transfer of value. The nature of each payment or other transfer of value, as described in paragraph (e) of this section. (8) Related covered drug, device, biological or medical supply. Report the marketed or brand name of the related covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies, and therapeutic area or product category unless the payment or other transfer of value is not related to a particular covered drug, device, biological or medical supply. (i) For drugs and biologicals— (A) If the marketed name has not yet been selected, applicable manufacturers must indicate the name registered on clinicaltrials.gov . (B) Any regularly used identifiers must be reported, including, but not limited to, national drug codes. (ii) For devices, if the device has a unique device identifier (UDI), then the device identifier (DI) portions of it must be reported, as applicable. (iii) Applicable manufacturers may report the marketed name and therapeutic area or product category for payments or other transfers of value related to a non-covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply. (iv) Applicable manufacturers must indicate if the related drug, device, biological, or medical supply is covered or non-covered. (v) Applicable manufacturers must indicate if the payment or other transfer of value is not related to any covered or non-covered drug, device, biological or medical supply. (9) Eligibility for delayed publication. Applicable manufacturers must indicate whether a payment or other transfer of value is eligible for delayed publication, as described in § 403.910. (10) Payments to third parties. (i) If the payment or other transfer of value was provided to a third party at the request of or designated on behalf of a covered recipient, the payment or transfer of value must be reported in the name of that covered recipient. (ii) If the payment or other transfer of value was provided to a third party at the request of or designated on behalf of a covered recipient, the name of the entity that received the payment or other transfer of value (if made to an entity) or indicate “individual” (if made to an individual). If a covered recipient performed a service, but neither accepted the offered payment or other transfer of value nor requested that it be made to a third party, the applicable manufacturer is not required to report the offered payment or other transfer of value unless the applicable manufacturer nonetheless provided it to a third party and designated such payment or other transfer of value as having been provided on behalf of the covered recipient. (11) Payments or transfers of value to physician owners or investors. Must indicate whether the payment or other transfer of value was provided to a physician or the immediate family of the physician who holds an ownership or investment interest (as defined § 403.902) in the applicable manufacturer. (12) Additional information or context for payment or transfer of value. May provide a statement with additional context for the payment or other transfer of value. (d) Reporting the form of payment or other transfer of value. An applicable manufacturer must report each payment or transfer of value, or separable part of that payment or transfer of value, as taking one of the following forms of payment that best describes the form of the payment or other transfer of value, or separable part of that payment or other transfer of value. (1) Cash or cash equivalent. (2) In-kind items or services. (3) Stock. (4) Stock option. (5) Any other ownership interest. (6) Dividend, profit or other return on investment. (e) Reporting the nature of the payment or other transfer of value. (1) General rule. The categories describing the nature of a payment or other transfer of value are mutually exclusive for the purposes of reporting under subpart I of this part. (2) Rules for categorizing natures of payment. An applicable manufacturer must categorize each payment or other transfer of value, or separable part of that payment or transfer of value, with one of the categories listed in paragraphs (e)(2)(i) through (xviii) of this section, using the designation that best describes the nature of the payment or other transfer of value, or separable part of that payment or other transfer of value. If a payment or other transfer of value could reasonably be considered as falling within more than one category, the applicable manufacturer should select one category that it deems to most accurately describe the nature of the payment or transfer of value. (i) Consulting fee. (ii) Compensation for services other than consulting, including serving as faculty or as a speaker at an event other than a continuing education program. (iii) Honoraria. (iv) Gift. (v) Entertainment. (vi) Food and beverage. (vii) Travel and lodging (including the specified destinations). (viii) Education. (ix) Research. (x) Charitable contribution. (xi) Debt forgiveness. (xii) Royalty or license. (xiii) Current or prospective ownership or investment interest. (xiv) Compensation for serving as faculty or as a speaker for a medical education program. (xv) Long term medical supply or device loan. (xvi) Grant. (xvii) Space rental or facility fees (teaching hospital only). (xviii) Acquisitions. (f) Special rules for research payments. All payments or other transfers of value made in connection with an activity that meets the definition of research in this section and that are subject to a written agreement, a research protocol, or both, must be reported under these special rules. (1) Research-related payments or other transfers of value to covered recipients, including research-related payments or other transfers of value made indirectly to a covered recipient through a third party, must be reported to CMS separately from other payments or transfers of value, and must include the following information (in lieu of the information required by § 403.904(c)): (i) Name of the research institution, individual or entity receiving the payment or other transfer of value. (A) If paid to a non-teaching hospital covered recipient, all of the following must be provided: ( 1 ) The non-teaching hospital covered recipient's name as listed in the NPPES (if applicable). ( 2 ) National Provider Identifier. ( 3 ) State professional license number(s) (for at least one State where the non-teaching hospital covered recipient maintains a license) and State(s) in which the license is held. ( 4 ) Specialty. ( 5 ) Primary business address of the non-teaching hospital covered recipient(s). (B) If paid to a teaching hospital covered recipient, list the name and primary business address of teaching hospital. (C) If paid to a non-covered recipient (such as a non-teaching hospital or clinic), list the name and primary business address of the entity. (ii) Total amount of the research payment, including all research-related costs for activities outlined in a written agreement, research protocol, or both. (iii) Name of the research study. (iv) Name(s) of any related covered drugs, devices, biologicals, or medical supplies (subject to the requirements specified in paragraph (c)(8) of this section); for drugs and biologicals, the relevant National Drug Code(s), if any; and for devices and medical supplies, the relevant device identifier, if any, and the therapeutic area or product category if a marketed name is not available. (v) Information about each non-teaching hospital covered recipient principal investigator (if applicable) set forth in paragraph (f)(1)(i)(A) of this section. (vi) Contextual information for research (optional). (vii) ClinicalTrials.gov identifier (optional). (2) For pre-clinical studies (before any human studies have begun), only report the following information: (i) Research entity name (as required in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this section). (ii) Total amount of payment (as required in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this section). (ii) Principal investigator(s) (as required in paragraph (f)(1)(v) of this section). (g) Special rules for reporting food and beverage. (1) When allocating the cost of food and beverage among covered recipients in a group setting where the cost of each individual covered recipient's meal is not separately identifiable, such as a platter provided to physicians in a group practice setting, applicable manufacturers must calculate the value per person by dividing the entire cost of the food or beverage by the total number of individuals who partook in the meal (including both covered recipients and non-covered recipients, such as office staff). The per person value of the meal must be reported as a payment or other transfer of value only for covered recipients who actually partook in the food or beverage. (2) Applicable manufacturers are not required to report or track buffet meals, snacks, soft drinks, or coffee made generally available to all participants of a large-scale conference or similar large-scale event. (h) Exclusions from reporting. The following are excluded from the reporting requirements specified in this section: (1) Indirect payments or other transfers of value (as defined in § 403.902), where the applicable manufacturer is unaware of the identity of the covered recipient. An applicable manufacturer is unaware of the identity of a covered recipient if the applicable manufacturer does not know (as defined in § 403.902) the identity of the covered recipient during the reporting year or by the end of the second quarter of the following reporting year. (2)(i) For CY 2013, payments or other transfers of value less than $10, unless the aggregate amount transferred to, requested by, or designated on behalf of the covered recipient exceeds $100 in a calendar year. (ii) For CY 2014 and subsequent calendar years, to determine if transfers of value are excluded under this section, the dollar amounts specified in paragraph (h)(2)(i) of this section must be increased by the same percentage as the percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city average) for the 12-month period ending with June of the previous year. CMS will publish the values for the next reporting year 90 days before the beginning of the reporting year. (iii) Payments or other transfers of value of less than $10 in CY 2013 (or less than the amount described in paragraph (h)(2)(i) of this section for CY 2014 and subsequent calendar years) provided at large-scale conferences and similar large-scale events, as well as events open to the public, do not need to be reported nor included for purposes of the $100 aggregate threshold in CY 2013 (or the aggregate threshold calculated in accordance paragraph (h)(2)(i) of this section for CY 2014 and subsequent calendar years), even if the aggregate total for a covered recipient exceeds the aggregate threshold for the calendar year. (iv) When reporting payments or other transfers of value under the $10 threshold for CY 2013 (or under the amount described in paragraph (i)(2)(ii) of this section for CY 2014 and subsequent calendar years) for covered recipients that exceed the aggregate threshold for the reporting year, applicable manufacturers may (but are not required to) report all small payments to a particular covered recipient that fall within the same nature of payment category as a single payment or other transfer of value. (3) Product samples, including coupons and vouchers that can be used by a patient to obtain samples, which are not intended to be sold and are intended for patient use. (4) Educational materials and items that directly benefit patients or are intended to be used by or with patients, including the value of an applicable manufacturer's services to educate patients regarding a covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply. (5) Short term medical supply or device loan. (6) Items or services provided under a contractual warranty (including service or maintenance agreements), whether or not the warranty period has expired, including the replacement of a covered device, where the terms of the warranty are set forth in the purchase or lease agreement for the covered device. (7) A transfer of anything of value to a non-teaching hospital covered recipient when the covered recipient is a patient, research subject or participant in data collection for research, and not acting in the professional capacity of a covered recipient. (8) Discounts, including rebates. (9) In-kind items used for the provision of charity care. (10) A dividend or other profit distribution from, or ownership or investment interest in, a publicly traded security or mutual fund. (11) In the case of an applicable manufacturer who offers a self-insured plan or directly reimburses for healthcare expenses, payments for the provision of health care to employees and their families. (12) In the case of a covered recipient who is a licensed non-medical professional, a transfer of anything of value to the covered recipient if the transfer is payment solely for the non-medical professional services of the licensed non-medical professional. (13) In the case of a non-teaching hospital covered recipient, a transfer of anything of value to the covered recipient if the transfer is payment solely for the services of the covered recipient with respect to an administrative proceeding, legal defense, prosecution, or settlement or judgment of a civil or criminal action and arbitration. (14) A payment or transfer of value to a covered recipient if the payment or transfer of value is made solely in the context of a personal, non-business-related relationship. [78 FR 9521, Feb. 8, 2013, as amended at 79 FR 68000, Nov. 13, 2014; 84 FR 63186, Nov. 15, 2019; 86 FR 65659, Nov. 19, 2021] § 403.906 Reports of physician ownership and investment interests. (a) General rule. (1) Each applicable manufacturer and applicable group purchasing organization must report to CMS on an annual basis all ownership and investment interests in the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that were held by a physician or an immediate family member of a physician during the preceding calendar year. (2) For CY 2013, only ownership or investment interests held on or after August 1, 2013 must be reported to CMS. (b) Identifying information. Reports on physician ownership and investment interests must include the following identifying information: (1) Name of the physician (as listed in the National Plan & Provider Enumeration System (if applicable), including first and last name, middle initial, and suffix (for all that apply), and an indication of whether the ownership or investment interest was held by the physician or an immediate family member of the physician. (2) Primary business address of the physician, including the following: (i) Street address. (ii) Suite or office number (if applicable). (iii) City. (iv) State. (v) ZIP code. (3) The following information for the physician (regardless of whether the ownership or investment interest is held by an immediate family member of the physician): (i) The specialty. (ii) National Provider Identifier (if applicable and as listed in NPPES). (iii) State professional license number(s) (for at least one State where the physician maintains a license), and the State(s) in which the license is held. (4) Dollar amount invested by each physician or immediate family member of the physician. (5) Value and terms of each ownership or investment interest. (6) Direct and indirect payments or other transfers of value provided to a physician holding an ownership or investment interest, and direct and indirect payments or other transfers of value provided to a third party at the request of or designated by the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization on behalf of a physician owner or investor, must be reported by the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization in accordance with the requirements for reporting payments or other transfers of value in § 403.904(c) through (h). The terms “applicable manufacturer and applicable group purchasing organization” must be substituted for “applicable manufacturer,” and “physician owner or investor” must be substituted for “covered recipient” in each place they appear. [78 FR 9521, Feb. 8, 2013, as amended at 79 FR 68001, Nov. 13, 2014] § 403.908 Procedures for electronic submission of reports. (a) File format. Reports required under this subpart must be electronically submitted to CMS by March 31, 2014, and by the 90th day of each subsequent calendar year. (b) General rules. (1) If an applicable manufacturer made no reportable payments or transfers of value in the previous calendar year, nor had any reportable ownership or investment interests held by a physician or a physician's immediate family member (as defined in § 403.902) during the previous calendar year, the applicable manufacturer is not required to file a report. (2) If an applicable group purchasing organization had no reportable ownership or investment interests held by a physician or physician's immediate family member during the previous calendar year, the applicable group purchasing organization is not required to file a report. (c) Registration. (1) Applicable manufacturers that have reportable payments or other transfers of value, ownership or investment interests, or both, are required to report under this subpart and must register with CMS within 90 days of the end of the calendar year for which a report is required. (2) Applicable group purchasing organizations that have reportable ownership or investment interests are required to report under this subpart and must register with CMS within 90 days of the end of the calendar year for which a report is required. (3) During registration, applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations must name two points of contact with appropriate contact information. These points of contact must be updated for 2 years following record submission. (4) An applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that meets the definition of physician-owned distributorship as defined in § 403.902 must identify its status as a physician-owned distributorship when registering or recertifying. (d) Other rules. (1) Consolidated reports. (i) An applicable manufacturer under paragraph (1) of the definition that is under common ownership with separate entities that are also applicable manufacturers under paragraph (1) of the definition may, but is not required to, file a consolidated report of all the payments or other transfers of value to covered recipients, and physician ownership or investment interests, for all of the entities. (ii) An applicable manufacturer under paragraph (1) of the definition of applicable manufacturer and an entity (or entities) under common ownership with the applicable manufacturer under paragraph (2) of the definition of applicable manufacturer may, but are not required to, file a consolidated report of all the payments or other transfers of value to covered recipients, and physician ownership or investment interests. (iii) If multiple applicable manufacturers (under paragraph (1) or (2) of the definition or both paragraphs of the definition) submit a consolidated report, the report must provide the names of each applicable manufacturer and entity (or entities) under common ownership that the report covers, and the report must identify the specific entity that provided each payment. (iv) A single payment or other transfer of value reported in a consolidated report must only be reported once by one applicable manufacturer. (v) The applicable manufacturer submitting a consolidated report on behalf of itself and other applicable manufacturers under common ownership, as permitted under this paragraph, is liable for civil monetary penalties imposed on each of the applicable manufacturers whose reportable payments or other transfers of value were included in the consolidated report, up to the annual maximum amount specified in § 403.912(c) for each individual applicable manufacturer included in the report. (2) Joint ventures. If a payment or other transfer of value is provided in accordance with a joint venture or other cooperative agreement between two or more applicable manufacturers, the payment or other transfer of value must be reported— (i) In the name of the applicable manufacturer that actually furnished the payment or other transfer of value to the covered recipient, unless the terms of a written agreement between the applicable manufacturers specifically require otherwise, so long as the agreement requires that all payments or other transfers of value in accordance with the arrangement are reported by one of the applicable manufacturers; and (ii) Only once by one applicable manufacturer. (e) Attestation. Each report, including any subsequent corrections to a filed report, must include an attestation by the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Compliance Officer, or other Officer of the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that the information reported is timely, accurate, and complete to the best of his or her knowledge and belief. For applicable manufacturers choosing to submit a consolidated report in accordance with paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the applicable manufacturer submitting the consolidated report must attest on behalf of itself, in addition to each of the other applicable manufacturers included in the consolidated report. (f) Assumptions document. Applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations may submit an assumptions document, explaining the reasonable assumptions made and methodologies used when reporting payments or other transfers of value, or ownership or investment interests. The assumptions documents will not be made available to covered recipients, physician owners or investors, or the public. (g) 45-day review period for review and error correction. (1) General rule. Applicable manufacturers, applicable group purchasing organizations, covered recipients, and physician owners or investors must have an opportunity to review and submit corrections to the information submitted for a period of not less than 45-days before CMS makes the information available to the public. In no case may this 45-day period for review and submission of corrections prevent the information from being made available to the public. (2) Notification. CMS notifies the applicable manufacturers, applicable group purchasing organizations, covered recipients, and physician owners or investors when the reported information is ready for review. (i) Applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations are notified through the points of contact they identified during registration. (ii) Covered recipients— (A) Are notified using an online posting and notifications on CMS's listserves. (B) May also register with CMS to receive notification about the review processes. (iii) The 45-day review period begins on the date specified in the online notification. (3) Process. (i) An applicable manufacturer, applicable group purchasing organization, covered recipient or a physician owner or investor may log into a secure Web site to view only the information reported specifically about itself. (ii) Covered recipients and physician owners or investors are able to review data submitted about them for the previous reporting year. (iii) If the applicable manufacturer, applicable group purchasing organization, covered recipient, or physician owner or investor agrees with the information reported, the applicable manufacturer, applicable group purchasing organization, covered recipient, or physician owner or investor may electronically certify that the information reported is accurate. (iv) If a covered recipient or physician owner or investor disagrees with the information reported, the covered recipient or physician owner or investor can initiate a dispute, which is sent to the appropriate applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization to be resolved between the parties. (v) Covered recipients and physician owners or investors may initiate disputes at any time after the 45-day period begins, but before the end of the calendar year, but any changes resulting from disputes initiated outside the 45-day period, may not be made until the next time the data is refreshed. (4) Data disputes. (i) In order to be corrected prior to the publication of the data, applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations must notify CMS of resolved disputes and changes to the information submitted by no later than 15 days after the end of the 45-day period (that is, 60 days after the 45-day review period begins). (ii) Disputes which are not resolved by 15 days after the end of the review and correction period, may still be resolved, but any changes resulting from the disputes may be made until the next time the data is refreshed. (iii) If the dispute is not resolved by 15 days after the end of the 45-day review and correction period, CMS publicly reports and aggregates the applicable manufacturer's or applicable group purchasing organization's version of the payment or other transfer of value, or ownership or investment interest data, but marks the payment or other transfer of value or ownership or investment interest as disputed. (h) Errors or omissions. (1) If an applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization discovers an error or omission in its annual report, it must submit corrected information to CMS immediately upon confirmation of the error or omission. (2) Upon receipt, CMS notifies the affected covered recipient or physician owner or investor that the additional information has been submitted and is available for review. CMS updates the Web site at least once annually with corrected information. [78 FR 9521, Feb. 8, 2013, as amended at 84 FR 63187, Nov. 15, 2019; 86 FR 65659, Nov. 19, 2021] § 403.910 Delayed publication for payments made under product research or development agreements and clinical investigations. (a) General rule. Certain research payments or other transfers of value made to a covered recipient by an applicable manufacturer under a product research or development agreement may be delayed from publication on the Web site. Publication of a payment or other transfer of value is delayed when made in connection with the following instances: (1) Research on or development of a new drug, device, biological, or medical supply, or a new application of an existing drug, device, biological, or medical supply. (2) Clinical investigations regarding a new drug, device, biological, or medical supply. (b) Research or development agreement. The research or development agreement must include a written agreement, a research protocol, or both between the applicable manufacturer and covered recipient. (c) Date of publication. Payments or other transfers of value eligible for delayed publication must be reported to CMS (in the manner required in § 403.904(f)) on the first reporting date following the year in which they occur, but CMS does not publicly post the payment until the first annual publication date after the earlier of the following: (1) The date of the approval, licensure or clearance of the covered drug, device, biological, or medical supply by FDA. (2) Four calendar years after the date the payment or other transfer of value was made. (d) Notification of delayed publication. (1) An applicable manufacturer must indicate on its research report to CMS whether a payment or other transfer of value is eligible for a delay in publication. The absence of this indication in the report will result in CMS posting all payments publicly in the first year of public reporting. (2) An applicable manufacturer must continue to indicate annually in its report that FDA approval, licensure, or clearance of the new drug, device, biological or medical supply to which the payment or other transfer of value is related, is pending. (3) An applicable manufacturer must notify CMS during subsequent annual submissions, if the new drug, device, biological or medical supply, to which the payment is related (or the new application of the existing drug, device, biological, or medical supply), is approved by the FDA. (4) Failure to notify CMS when FDA approval occurs may be considered failure to report, and the applicable manufacturer may be subject to civil monetary penalties. (5) If, after 4 years from the date of a payment first appearing in a report to CMS, there is an indication in a report that the payment is subject to delayed reporting, it is reported regardless of the indication. (e) Confidentiality. Information submitted and eligible for delayed publication is considered confidential and will not be subject to disclosure under 5 U.S.C. 552, or any similar Federal, State, or local law, until on or after the date on which the information made available to the public as required in this section. § 403.912 Penalties for failure to report. (a) Failure to report. (1) Any applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that fails to timely, accurately or completely report the information required in accordance with the rules established under this subpart is subject to a civil monetary penalty of not less than $1,000, but not more than $10,000, as adjusted annually under 45 CFR part 102 for each payment or other transfer of value or ownership or investment interest not reported timely, accurately, or completely. (2) The total amount of civil monetary penalties imposed on each applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization (regardless of whether the applicable manufacturer was a part of a consolidated report) with respect to failures to report in an annual submission of information will not exceed $150,000 as adjusted annually under 45 CFR part 102. (b) Knowing failure to report. (1) Any applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization that knowingly fails to timely, accurately or completely report the information required in accordance with the rules established under this subpart is subject to a civil monetary penalty of not less than $10,000, but not more than $100,000, as adjusted annually under 45 CFR part 102 for each payment or other transfer of value or ownership or investment interest not reported timely, accurately, or completely. (2) The total amount of civil monetary penalties imposed on each applicable manufacturer or group purchasing organization (regardless of whether the applicable manufacturer was a part of a consolidated report) with respect to knowing failures to report in an annual submission of information will not exceed $1,000,000 as adjusted annually under 45 CFR part 102. (c) Total annual civil monetary penalties. The amount of civil monetary penalties imposed on each applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization under paragraphs (a)(1) and (b)(1) of this section are— (1) Aggregated separately; (2) Subject to separate aggregate totals under paragraphs (a)(2) and (b)(2) of this section, with a maximum combined annual total of $1,150,000 as adjusted annually under 45 CFR part 102. (d) Determinations regarding the amount of civil monetary penalties. In determining the amount of the civil monetary penalty, factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) The length of time the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization failed to report, including the length of time the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization knew of the payment or other transfer of value, or ownership or investment interest. (2) Amount of the payment the applicable manufacturer or applicable group purchasing organization failed to report. (3) Level of culpability. (4) Nature and amount of information reported in error. (5) Degree of diligence exercised in correcting information reported in error. (e) Record retention and audits. (1) Maintenance of records. (i) Applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations must maintain all books, contracts, records, documents, and other evidence sufficient to enable the audit, evaluation, and inspection of the applicable manufacturer's or applicable group purchasing organization's compliance with the requirement to timely, accurately or completely submit information in accordance with the rules established under this subpart. (ii) The items described in paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section must be maintained for a period of at least 5 years from the date the payment or other transfer of value, or ownership or investment interest is published publicly on the Web site. (2) Audit. HHS, CMS, OIG or their designees may audit, inspect, investigate and evaluate any books, contracts, records, documents, and other evidence of applicable manufacturers and applicable group purchasing organizations that pertain to their compliance with the requirement to timely, accurately or completely submit information in accordance with the rules established under this subpart. (3) The requirements in this subpart are in addition to, and do not limit, any other applicable requirements that may obligate applicable manufacturers or applicable group purchasing organizations to retain and allow access to records. (f) Use of funds. Funds collected by the Secretary as a result of the imposition of a civil monetary penalty under this section must be used to carry out the operation of this subpart. (g) Notice, hearings, appeals, and collection. Civil monetary penalties imposed under this section are subject to the provisions set forth in subparts A and B of part 402 of this chapter, including those pertaining to notice, opportunity for a hearing, appeals procedures, and collection of penalties. [78 FR 9521, Feb. 8, 2013, as amended at 81 FR 61561, Sept. 6, 2016; 82 FR 42749, Sept. 12, 2017] § 403.914 Preemption of State laws. (a) General rule. In the case of a payment or other transfer of value provided by an applicable manufacturer to a covered recipient, this subpart preempts any statute or regulation of a State or political subdivision of a State that requires an applicable manufacturer to disclose or report, in any format, the type of information regarding the payment or other transfer of value required to be reported under this subpart. (b) Information collected for public health purposes. (1) Information required to be reported to a Federal, State, or local governmental agency for public health surveillance, investigation, or other public health purposes or health oversight purposes must still be reported to appropriate Federal, State, or local governmental agencies, regardless of whether the same information is required to be reported under this subpart. (2) Governmental agencies include, but are not limited to, the following: (i) Agencies that are charged with preventing or controlling disease, injury, disability. (ii) Agencies that conduct oversight activities authorized by law, including audits, investigations, inspections, licensure or disciplinary actions, or other activities necessary for oversight of the health care system. Subpart K—Access to Identifiable Data for the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Models Source: 79 FR 68001, Nov. 13, 2014, unless otherwise noted. § 403.1100 Purpose and scope. The regulations in this subpart implement section 1115A of the Act. The intent of that section is to enable CMS to test innovative payment and service delivery models to reduce program expenditures while preserving and/or enhancing the quality of care furnished to individuals under titles XVIII, XIX, and XXI of the Act. The Secretary is also required to conduct an evaluation of each model tested. § 403.1105 Definitions. For purposes of this subpart— Applicable titles means Titles XVIII, XIX, or XXI of the Act. § 403.1110 Evaluation of models. (a) Evaluation. The Secretary conducts an evaluation of each model tested under section 1115A of the Act. Such evaluation must include an analysis of the following: (1) The quality of care furnished under the model, including the measurement of patient-level outcomes and patient-centeredness criteria determined appropriate by the Secretary. (2) The changes in spending under the applicable titles by reason of the model. (b) Information. Any State or other entity participating in the testing of a model under section 1115A of the Act must collect and report such information, including “protected health information” as that term is defined at 45 CFR 160.103, as the Secretary determines is necessary to monitor and evaluate such model. Such data must be produced to the Secretary at the time and in the form and manner specified by the Secretary. Subpart L—Requirements for Direct-to-Consumer Television Advertisements of Drugs and Biological Products To Include the List Price of That Advertised Product Source: 84 FR 20757, May 10, 2019, unless otherwise noted. § 403.1200 Scope. (a) Covered pharmaceuticals. Except as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, this subpart applies to advertisements for a prescription drug or biological product distributed in the United States for which payment is available, directly or indirectly, under titles XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act. (b) Excepted pharmaceuticals. An advertisement for any prescription drug or biological product that has a list price, as defined in § 403.1201, less than $35 per month for a 30-day supply or typical course of treatment shall be exempt from the requirements of this subpart. § 403.1201 Definitions. For the purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply: (a) Biological product. Biological product means any biological product, as that term is defined in Public Health Service Act (“PHS Act”) section 351(i), that is licensed by the Food and Drug Administration pursuant to section 351 and is subject to the requirements of Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) section 503(b)(1). (b) Prescription drug. Prescription drug means any drug, as defined in the FDCA section 201(g), that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration pursuant to FDCA section 505 and is subject to the requirements of FDCA section 503(b)(1). (c) List price. List price means the wholesale acquisition cost, as defined in paragraph (d) of this section. (d) Wholesale acquisition cost. Wholesale acquisition cost means, with respect to a prescription drug or biological product, the manufacturer's list price for the prescription drug or biological product to wholesalers or direct purchasers in the United States, not including prompt pay or other discounts, rebates or reductions in price, for the most recent month for which the information is available, as reported in wholesale price guides or other publications of drug or biological product pricing data. § 403.1202 Pricing information. Any advertisement for any prescription drug or biological product on television (including broadcast, cable, streaming, or satellite) must contain a textual statement indicating the current list price for a typical 30-day regimen or for a typical course of treatment, whichever is most appropriate, as determined on the first day of the quarter during which the advertisement is being aired or otherwise broadcast, as follows: “The list price for a [30-day supply of ] [typical course of treatment with] [name of prescription drug or biological product] is [insert list price]. If you have health insurance that covers drugs, your cost may be different.” Where the price is related to the typical course of treatment and that typical course of treatment varies depending on the indication for which a prescription drug or biological product is prescribed, the list price to be used is the one for the typical course of treatment associated with the primary indication addressed in the advertisement. § 403.1203 Specific presentation requirements. The textual statement described in § 403.1202 shall be presented at the end of an advertisement in a legible manner, meaning that it is placed appropriately and is presented against a contrasting background for sufficient duration and in a size and style of font that allows the information to be read easily. § 403.1204 Compliance. (a) Identification of non-compliant products. The Secretary will maintain a public list that will include the prescription drugs and biological products identified by the Secretary to be advertised in violation of this subpart. (b) State or local requirements. No State or political subdivision of any State may establish or continue in effect any requirement concerning the disclosure in a television advertisement of the pricing of a prescription drug or biological product which is different from, or in addition to, any requirement imposed by this subpart.
