SECTION A: POLICIES AND PLANNING Section A: Table of Contents Policy and Organizational Statements Risk Assessment Process Mitigation Overview Planning Assumptions Communications Resident and Family Information Continuity of Operations Role of the Facility under an 1135 Waiver Serving as an Alternate Care Site Shelter in Place Plan Loss of Utilities Authority to Activate the Plan Order of Succession – Incident Command Team Disaster Staffing Resident Medical Information Training and Testing Program Training Annual Testing EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN Policy and Organizational Statements The Emergency Preparedness Program (EPP) was developed using an all-hazards approach to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local emergency preparedness requirements. The EPP was developed in collaboration with< Insert names of collaborative partners and stakeholders >. This plan has been reviewed with <Insert local emergency response agencies > to ensure an integrated response during a disaster or emergency situation impacting the facility. The Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) and its components are the master operations documents for the campus in responding to all emergencies and all catastrophic, major, and minor disasters. The plan defines the responsibilities of all levels of management that make up the facility’s Healthcare Incident Command Team. This plan will be reviewed and updated on an annual basis, and the <Insert title > will be assigned this responsibility. Should there be significant revisions to the plan, all staff will be trained regarding the revisions. An “Annual Review and Analysis” document is found in Appendix J. The EOP is compliant with the National Incident Management System (NIMS) and incorporates the principles set forth in the Incident Command System (ICS). The plan describes the basic strategies, assumptions, operational objectives, and mechanisms through which the Incident Command Team will mobilize resources and conduct activities to guide and support campus, local, and state emergency management efforts through preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation. The EOP is designed to be flexible, adaptable, and scalable. The plan articulates the roles and responsibilities of the Incident Command Team in its response and coordination with local, state, and federal emergency officials. The EOP includes the following sections and appendices: Section A: Policies and Planning (this section) Section B: Procedures Applicable to All-Hazard Responses Section C: Incident Command System Section D: Full Building Evacuation Plan Section E: Emergency Procedures for Specific Events Section F: Emergency Resources and Lists Section G: Disaster Recovery Plan Appendices: Appendix A: Hazard Vulnerability Assessment (HVA) Appendix B: Sample Mutual Aid Agreements / Memorandum(s) of Understanding Appendix C: Compliance Schedule / Calendar Appendix D: Sample Vendor Agreements Appendix E: Evacuation Route Maps Appendix F: Organizational Chart and Roster of Staff with Key Disaster Roles Appendix G: Resident and Responsible Party – Sample Emergency Communications Plan Appendix H: Staff Competency Post Training Test Appendix I: Collaborative and Cooperative Planning Efforts Documentation Appendix J: Annual Analysis and Review Appendix K: EPP Quick Reference Guide (11x17) Appendix L: 1135 Waivers Appendix M: EPP Burn Rate Calculator Appendix N: Contact Listing for Facility Physicians Appendix O: Entities Providing Services Under Arrangement Appendix P: Contact Listing for Facility Volunteers The EPP is always in effect. The plans and operational procedures within the EPP are executed on an as-needed basis as determined by the Administrator or highest-ranking member of the leadership team onsite at the time of the event (Incident Commander). The purpose of the EPP is to: Develop an all-hazards planning approach that will be used for all threats to and/or emergencies or disasters that may impact the campus. Create the general framework of planning for preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation activities of the campus. Reduce the vulnerability of residents, staff, visitors, and the community, including the loss of life or injury, or the damage and loss of property resulting from natural, technological, and man-made disasters, by developing effective preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation plans. Describe the facility’s role in coordinating with and supporting local, state, and federal governments during an emergency or disaster. Describe the types of disasters that are likely to impact the campus, from local emergencies to minor, major, or catastrophic disasters. The facility will engage local officials as part of its effort to develop an HVA through collaborative and cooperative planning efforts. Appendix A outlines the agencies or personnel the facility has engaged in the process. Risk Assessment Process The Emergency Preparedness Plan is based upon the Facility Specific and Community Hazard Vulnerability Assessments (HVA). The HVA provides a systematic approach to recognizing hazards that may affect demand for nursing homes or assisted living residences or the ability to provide those services. The risks associated with each hazard are analyzed to prioritize planning, mitigation, response, and recovery activities. The HVA serves as a needs assessment for the Emergency Preparedness Program. This process involves facility staff representing the safety and/or emergency management committee and community partners (area emergency managers, fire and police departments, and emergency management services). The facility incorporates risks identified in the Community Hazard Vulnerability Assessment into its emergency planning process and procedure development, where applicable. The Facility HVA can be found in Appendix A. The facility will utilize the output of the HVA, focusing on the top 5 to 10 relative risks, to develop a mitigation strategy, as appropriate. Mitigation Overview The facility will use the output of the HVA, focusing on the top 5 to 10 relative risks, to develop a mitigation strategy, as appropriate. To minimize the impact on resident care and business operations during an emergency, the facility has completed the following mitigation activities: Development and continuous maintenance of the Emergency Preparedness Program Procurement of emergency supplies and resources Agreements in place with other healthcare facilities to provide assistance in the event of evacuation including, but not limited to: Receiving facilities Transportation resources Sharing of equipment and supplies Vendor agreements Staff training, drills, and exercises Mitigation strategies identified in the Hazard Vulnerability Assessment Planning Assumptions The Emergency Preparedness Program, specifically the Emergency Operations Plan, is guided by the following planning assumptions: Emergencies and disasters can occur without notice, any day, and on any shift. Emergencies and disasters may be facility-specific, local, regional, or state-wide. Local and/or state authorities may declare an emergency. The facility may receive requests from other facilities for resource support (supplies, equipment, staffing, transportation, or to serve as a receiving facility). Facility security may be compromised during certain emergencies. The disaster or emergency may exceed the facility’s capabilities, and external resources and assets may not be available from vendors or others. The facility is prepared to be self-sustaining for a minimum of 96 hours or longer without outside assistance if conditions allow for safe sheltering in place. Backup power systems could fail, as well as other critical backup systems such as Electronic Health Records, building automation systems, etc. During community-wide or regional events, it may be difficult for staff to travel to or from the facility. The facility is prepared to shelter staff (and staff families/pets) as necessary and authorized by the Incident Commander. Communications The Communications Plan is developed to comply with local, state, and federal law. Similar to the EPP, the Communications Plan will be reviewed and updated at least annually. The Communications Plan provides names and contact information for staff, entities providing services under arrangement, residents’ physicians, other healthcare facilities, and volunteers. Additionally, local, regional, and state emergency response and emergency management agencies and other sources of assistance are provided in this plan. These contact lists are located in Section F: Emergency Resources and Lists. Primary and alternate means for communicating with facility staff and external partners, including local, regional, and state emergency responders and emergency management agencies, are listed in Section B: Procedures Applicable to All-Hazard Responses. The facility maintains a list of all staff members in the __________________ software program located on the facility Intranet, including emergency contact information . The EPP addresses methods for sharing information and medical documentation for residents under the facility’s care, as necessary, with other health care providers to maintain continuity of care during emergency or disaster events, including evacuation of the facility. These methods are outlined in the Emergency Operations Plan sections as follows: Section B: Procedures Applicable to All-Hazard Responses Section C: Incident Command System Section D: Full Building Evacuation Plan Section E: Emergency Procedures for Specific Events The facility maintains a daily list of residents, including their condition and location. The census list will be updated routinely throughout the day, as necessary . During emergency or disaster-related events, resident information may be shared or released, as permitted under 45 CFR 164,510 (b) (1) (ii) and 164.510 (b) (4), through assigned roles and responsibilities in the facility Incident Command System. If the facility is forced to relocate or evacuate residents, the release or sharing of resident information shall be coordinated through assigned roles and responsibilities outlined in the facility’s Full Building Evacuation Plan. The facility will communicate with local, regional, and state emergency responders and emergency management agencies, local and state health departments, mutual aid plans / healthcare coalitions, and/or other healthcare facilities, when applicable, the following information during an emergency or disaster: Its occupancy Any resource or asset needs Ability to provide assistance to other facilities The Incident Command System assigns specific roles and responsibilities for the communication of this information. Additionally, reporting of this information is accomplished electronically through the use of <Insert correct terminology >. Resident and Family Information Upon admission, residents and their responsible parties will be provided with an Emergency Communications Plan Guide (See Appendix G). This guide details the expectations of residents and their families during an emergency event at the facility or during a community disaster. The plan provides families with alternate methods to contact the facility during a disaster when normal means of communication (telephones) may be inoperable. Alternatively, the facility may share information relative to the status of the facility or disaster on its webpage at <Insert facility website >. Continuity of Operations The Emergency Preparedness Plan takes into consideration its resident population, including the types of services and levels of care the facility provides. The facility is an Assisted Living Facility/Nursing Home/Skilled Nursing Home that provides the following levels of service : Bariatric Care Dementia/Alzheimer’s Care Ventilator Care IV/Tube Feedings Dialysis Therapy (Respiratory, Speech, OT/PT) Adult Day Care Respite Care Hospice Care Rehabilitation Home Care Behavioral Health In addition to the inherent risks associated with residents requiring these various levels of care, the plan also incorporates risks related to culture, ethnicity, and language. In the event an emergency or disaster impacts any of the services provided by the facility to its residents, the facility has developed contingency plans to ensure continued services to the extent possible. These plans include, but are not limited to, emergency procedures, vendor support, agreements with other healthcare facilities, mutual aid plan support, and support from local/state emergency management. Where specific outpatient services can no longer be provided, the facility has made arrangements with other providers as follows: Therapy (Respiratory, Speech, OT/PT) residents will be directed to<Insert location > Adult Day Care responsible parties will be notified that the Adult Day Care is closed and that alternative arrangements for long-duration cessation of services have been made with <Insert location >. Home Care client responsible parties will be notified that Home Care services cannot be provided and that alternative arrangements for long-duration cessation of services have been made with <Insert service or location >. Where inpatient services can no longer be provided, it may be necessary to make alternate care arrangements or evacuate the residents to another healthcare facility (See Full Building Evacuation Plan). The facility will maintain agreements with a temporary “stop-over” location and other healthcare facilities as receiving sites. Alternate care sites will be considered as identified by local Emergency Management officials. The facility will serve as an alternate care site if deemed necessary and as outlined in an 1135 waiver when issued. Role of the Facility under an 1135 Waiver The "role of the facility under a waiver declared by the Secretary, in accordance with section 1135 of the Act, may be the provision of care and treatment at an alternate care site identified by emergency management officials." Typically, if a decision is made to evacuate the facility, residents will be evacuated to other healthcare facilities which the facility has an agreement with. In cases where an 1135 waiver may not be applicable, the facility will follow procedures as outlined in the Full Building Evacuation Plan. In the event emergency management officials determine that residents must be evacuated to an Alternate Care Site versus another healthcare facility, the following actions will be taken into consideration by the Incident Command team: Activation of: The Incident Command System to manage the facility’s response The Full Building Evacuation Plan to package/prepare and track residents Mutual aid plans, written agreements, or memorandum of understanding with other healthcare facilities, suppliers, and vendors Notification – Through assigned roles and responsibilities in the Incident Command System, external notifications will be made with the following: Local emergency responders and emergency management officials Local and state health departments Communications – The following will be communicated with through assigned roles and responsibilities in the Incident Command System: Residents and their Responsible Parties Staff – On-duty and off-duty Local/state officials, as necessary The facility will contact the state health department to coordinate efforts during a declared emergency in which there is a waiver of federal requirements under section 1135 of the Act. News Media Local community via the News Media Resources and Assets – The Incident Commander will direct an assessment be completed to determine what resources and assets will be needed at the Alternate Care Site in order to provide for the safety, security, and care of residents to include, but not limited to, the following: Beds, Cots, Mattresses Commodes and Personal Disposables (briefs, etc.) Privacy Screens/Dividers Linen Supplies (Sheets, Blankets, towels, washcloths, etc.) and Pillows Emergency Cart/Box, AED, Vital Sign Equipment Portable Suction, Portable Oxygen w/ regulators, Oxygen concentrators Medical Supplies and Medical Equipment Medication Carts/Drawers, including medications and associated medication administration documentation Lifts Wheelchairs, Geri-Chairs Walkers, canes, and other mobility devices Tap Bells or other devices that can be used to notify staff Resident charts and forms to document continued resident care An adequate supply of food, water, dietary supplements, etc. Personal Protective Equipment (Gloves, masks, hand sanitizer, etc.) Isolation equipment and supplies Extra wristbands, markers, paper supplies, and pens/pencils Copies of the Full Building Evacuation Plan and contact information for staff, emergency agencies, vendors, and suppliers The facility may evacuate necessary equipment and supplies to the alternate care site or may rely upon its suppliers and/or vendors or other healthcare facilities. Staff should utilize the appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and always exercise Universal Precautions. Staffing – The facility will manage staffing as outlined in Section B: Management of Staff during a Disaster. In the event a waiver is granted to waive licensure to enable individuals to assist the facility where they do not normally practice, the facility will follow the Emergency Credentialing process detailed in the EPP. Transportation – The facility will c oordinate obtaining transportation resources with the Emergency Services/EMS via their Field Incident Command Post if they are on-site. Facility-owned vehicles and/or other healthcare facility vehicles may be utilized to transport residents, equipment, and supplies. Serving as an Alternate Care Site Alternatively, the facility may serve as an Alternate Care Site or Receiving Facility for another healthcare facility that is evacuating. The facility will activate its Surge Plan (Section B), which details the following: Notification and communications Assessment of impact on facility operations Assessment of surge beds and locations within the building Assessment of necessary surge equipment & supplies Staffing Establishment of a triage area; triage and tracking of incoming residents Credentialing of Staff from the evacuating facility or volunteers Shelter in Place Plan For the purposes of this planning, shelter in place (SIP) is defined as: A protective action strategy taken to maintain resident care in the facility and to limit the movement of residents, staff, and visitors in order to protect people and property from a hazard. The hazard can be weather, exterior chemical spills, civil unrest, utility failures, or any reason that would necessitate the consideration of sheltering in place or evacuation. When the reason for SIP is apparent (e.g., untenable conditions outside the facility) or when the evacuation decision is made clear when a mandatory evacuation order is issued, the choice of the facility is made. In the absence of a mandatory order but faced with a threat such as a hurricane, flooding, wildfire, or prolonged loss of power, to stay or go; it is not always clear which is the best course to take for the residents and the facility. While SIP is clearly a first option, it is a complex decision and a strategy that requires these steps in preparation: Planning Training Preparation Collaboration Continual Vigilance Robust Communication with Local Authorities The decision by the facility to SIP or evacuate will be made by the Facility Incident Commander (if activated) or the senior facility leadership at the time of an event, in collaboration with local authorities. The decision-making process will include, but is not limited to: Evacuation Orders Road Conditions Estimated time of arrival (if pre-event) Magnitude Area projected to be impacted Duration Impact or Evacuation Status of other Health Care Facilities Availability of Local Emergency Response and Assistance In the event of an evacuation, the Full Building Evacuation Plan would be executed. In the event of a decision to Shelter in Place for any reason, our entire Emergency Operations Plan constitutes our Shelter in Place Plan, and many aspects would apply and are executed as necessary, including, but not limited to: Activation of Emergency Operations, a < EOP activation code word > would be initiated, and the response would be coordinated from the Facility Command Center by the Facility Incident Management Team. Facility to include all aspects of Managing Command and Control, Managing Residents, Security and Safety, Staff and Volunteers, Resources and Assets, and Utilities during an Emergency Event. Facility to include Building / Campus Lockdown for Exterior Threat . Facility to include Staff / Staff Family / Staff Pet Sheltering. Facility to include Appendices that include details on sustainability plans, including: Facility Detail Report (Information, Resources & Assets) Resources & Assets/Generators: 96-hour Assessment & Detail Reports Loss of Utilities In the event of a loss of other utility services, emergency procedures have been developed that include contingency planning. Emergency power and standby systems are maintained in compliance with NFPA 99 and NFPA 110. Plans are in place to maintain an on-site fuel source to keep systems operational unless evacuation is deemed necessary. Authority to Activate the Plan In the event the CEO, Administrator, or Assistant Administrator are not available, the highest-ranking person in the facility at the time of the event will assume the role of Incident Commander and have overall authority relative to the facility’s response to the event. The facility organizational chart and staff roster with key disaster-related roles are located in Appendix F. Upon activation of the EOP, an assessment will be conducted to determine the current workforce and the future needs of the facility in the aftermath of a disaster. This will be accomplished through the use of the Department Rapid Assessment Form and Incident Command Team action plan development. Order of Succession – Incident Command Team Incident Command Position Primary Successor 1 Successor 2 Incident Commander Administrator Director of Nursing Nursing Supervisor Public Information Officer Marketing Manager Safety/Security/Liaison Officer Emergency Preparedness Coordinator Safety Officer Operations Chief Director of Nursing Nursing Supervisor Nurse Manager Planning Chief Director of Human Resources HR Specialist Logistics Chief Director of Plant Operations Lead Maintenance Staff Finance Chief CFO Accountant Disaster Staffing The Incident Command Team will conduct a thorough analysis of the facility’s current (or available) workforce to better understand what the future needs will be to recover from the disaster and ensure sufficient staffing. Disaster staffing strategies are outlined in Section B: Management of Staff during a Disaster. This process helps identify workforce needs and key strategies, goals, processes, and behaviors needed to effectively recover from a disaster. Resident Medical Information This facility has a system of medical documentation that preserves resident information, protects the confidentiality of resident information, and secures and maintains the availability of records. This is accomplished by: Insert information on the system of medical documentation here . The following are “sample” statements: The facility utilizes _______________ for Electronic Health Records (EHR), and it is backed up on a regular basis. Hard copy medical records are maintained safe and secure in the designated Medical Records section of the facility. Authorized and Medical Records personnel can access the records 24/7. In the event of an internal disaster, any hard copy medical records will be relocated by staff to a safe and secure location to preserve the records, prevent damage, and maintain the availability of the records. In the event of a facility evacuation, patient medical records will be transferred with the patient to their final destination. Electronic records will be printed on each patient unit, or as necessary may be remotely accessed using secure login information and passwords from other healthcare facilities by facility staff using the facility laptop . Protected Health Information policies and procedures will be adhered to during disaster and emergency events including facility evacuation. Training and Testing Program The Training & Testing Program will be reviewed and updated at least annually . The <Insert Title > will be responsible for reviewing and updating the Training & Testing Program. Training All staff, including individuals providing on-site services under arrangement and volunteers consistent with their expected roles, will be provided initial training in the Emergency Preparedness Program, specifically the Emergency Operations Plan. The facility will test staff competence in their knowledge of the Emergency Preparedness Program through the use of a post-training quiz and evaluations during drills and exercises. Annual Testing The facility will conduct annual testing of the Emergency Preparedness Program through exercising as follows: The facility will conduct two separate exercises on an annual basis. One of these exercises will be a community-based, full-scale exercise (when available), and the second may be a tabletop or similar exercise. Each calendar year, the facility will participate in a community-based, full-scale exercise. The facility is a mutual aid plan member and participates in a mutual aid exercise involving other healthcare facilities and local/regional partners, and emergency responders. This exercise serves as the required community-based, full-scale exercise. When a community-based, full-scale exercise is not available, the facility will conduct an individual, facility-based disaster on an annual basis and document its actions and invitations towards having community partners and stakeholders involved. If the facility experiences an actual natural or man-made emergency that requires the activation of the Emergency Preparedness Program, the facility may consider utilizing the actual event in lieu of conducting the community-based, full-scale exercise. The event will be critiqued, and an After-Action Report will be developed. The facility will conduct an internal functional exercise or a paper-based tabletop exercise annually. Tabletop exercises will include a group discussion led by a facilitator using a narrated, clinically-relevant emergency scenario and a set of problem statements, directed messages, or prepared questions designed to challenge the emergency plan. The facility’s response to each exercise will be documented to capture lessons learned, opportunities for plan and procedure improvements, and to evaluate staff knowledge and response. The facility will document all drills, tabletop exercises, and emergency events utilizing the After-Action Report (AAR) . Any plan revisions needed as a result of a drill or exercise will be captured in the Improvement Plan of the AAR. The <insert position or committee > will be responsible for reviewing, tracking, and assigning improvement tasks. Insert names of collaborative partners and stakeholders Insert name of local, regional or state response agencies plan was coordinated with Insert position title who will be assigned this responsibility. Use Appendix J to document annual review. The entire EPP can be reviewed at once or sections can be reviewed individually on an annual basis. Revise to match Table of Contents Insert correct position title Revise to reflect proper care level Revise if your planned shelter in place time is less Revise content of this plan to best fit the facility needs Describe how employee contact information can be obtained and where it is stored. Revise statement to reflect facility processes. Revise if different than stated Insert correct terminology (e.g., Health Alert Network, HHAN/HAN, etc.) for any reporting systems in use at the facility. Remove this reference if there are no applicable systems. Delete statement if not applicable to facility Revise to reflect proper care level Revise bulleted list to accurately reflect services provided by the facility Remove the reference to mutual aid plan support if the facility is not part of a mutual aid plan Delete paragraph if none of these services are provided by the facility Insert location where clients will be referred to Insert location where clients will be referred to Home Healthcare has separate unique emergency preparedness requirements. If you have a Home Healthcare component as part of your facility, be prepared to include them in your planning and exercises. Insert service or location where clients will be referred to Insert the facility’s EOP activation code word as applicable Insert applicable position title(s) The chart is populated with sample positions. Revise to reflect position titles in use at your facility. Outline the facility’s medical records systems. Outline electronic health record (EHR) systems, hardcopy systems, or a combination. Provide details on the system(s). For example, if you utilize EHR, list the name of the system, location, security and redundancy of servers, and accessibility to records from other, or off-site locations. For hard copy paper records, identify where they are located and how they are secured and kept safe. Reference any facility Protected Health Record Policies and Procedures. Insert name of EHR system. Delete if none. Revise statement to reflect best practices at your facility Some states require semi-annual review, revise as necessary Insert position title responsibility is assigned to Revise as needed Delete bullet and reference to mutual aid if not part of a formal mutual aid plan Revise if using a different documentation format Insert the appropriate position or committee for this purpose. Where applicable, consider this the role of the Emergency Preparedness Committee or Safety Committee.
